
"_Adventures are to the adventurous._"

BEACONSFIELD.

[Illustration: _THE ADVENTURE SERIES._]


THE ADVENTURE SERIES.

Illustrated. Cr. 8vo, 5s.

    1.

    Adventures of a Younger Son. By E.J. Trelawny. _With an Introduction
    by Edward Garnett._ Second Edition.

    2.

    Robert Drury's Journal in Madagascar. _Edited, with an Introduction
    and Notes, by Captain S.P. Oliver._

    3.

    Memoirs of the Extraordinary Military Career of John Shipp. _With an
    Introduction by H. Manners Chichester._

    4.

    The Adventures of Thomas Pellow, of Penryn, Mariner. _Written by
    himself, and edited with an Introduction and Notes by Dr. Robert
    Brown._

    _Others in the Press._



MEMOIRS OF THE
EXTRAORDINARY MILITARY
CAREER OF JOHN
SHIPP, LATE A LIEUT.
IN HIS MAJESTY'S 87TH
REGIMENT

WRITTEN BY HIMSELF. A
NEW ILLUSTRATED EDITION.
WITH AN INTRODUCTION
BY H. MANNERS CHICHESTER

LONDON: T. FISHER UNWIN,
PATERNOSTER SQUARE. MDCCCXC

[Illustration: LIEUTENANT JOHN SHIPP.]




CONTENTS.


                                                        PAGE

    (1) EDITOR'S INTRODUCTION                              7

    (2) AUTHOR'S PREFACE                                  15

    (3) MEMOIRS OF JOHN SHIPP                             17




LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS.


    (1) LIEUTENANT JOHN SHIPP                _Frontispiece._

    (2) SAXMUNDHAM CHURCH                    _To face p._ 32

    (3) PLAN OF BHURTPORE                       "         98

    (4) EUROPEAN CAVALRY OF SHIPP'S DAY         "        144

    (5) GHOORKA SOLDIER                         "        210

    (6) THE FORT OF HATTRASS                    "        216

    (7) TRAVELLING ON THE GANGES                "        236

    (8) INDIAN TROOPS OF SHIPP'S DAY            "        326

    (9) GHAUT ON THE GANGES                     "        360





INTRODUCTION.


In reproducing the "Memoirs of the Extraordinary Military Career of John
Shipp" as a volume of the Adventure Series, it may be well to say a few
introductory words concerning the author and the book.

John Shipp was, he tells us, the second son of Thomas and Lætitia Shipp,
persons in humble circumstances in the little town of Saxmundham, in
Suffolk, and he adds that in the registers of the parish church will be
found a record of his birth on March 16, 1785. The latter statement is
incorrect. The church register records baptisms, not births, and a
careful search has shown that the only entry answering to the above is a
record of the _baptism_ of John, the child of Thomas and Lætitia Shipp,
at a date twelve months earlier--March 16, 1784. The error probably
explains the conflicting statements of the author's age which occur in
the course of the story.

Shipp's father was a soldier (a marine?), and his mother dying when he
was very young, he became an inmate of the parish poorhouse (there were
no Union workhouses in those days), whence he passed into the hands of a
neighbouring farmer, one of those savage taskmasters only too common in
the "good old times."[1] His deliverance came in unexpected fashion. In
the early years of the French Revolutionary War the supply of recruits
was far less certain than at a later stage. Partly as a recruiting
experiment, partly to relieve parishes of the burthen of pauper boys
between the ages of ten and sixteen who might be willing to enter for
(_un_limited) service in the army, three regiments of foot were ordered
to be completed to a thousand rank and file each by the enlisting of
boys of this description. One of the regiments was the 22nd (Cheshire)
Regiment of Foot, which half a century later won much fame under the
command of General Sir Charles Napier on the plains of Sind. The 22nd,
on return from the West Indies in 1795, had been ordered to Colchester,
to recruit; and a Muster Roll, now in the War Office, shows that John
Shipp was duly enlisted into that regiment on January 17, 1797.

Shipp appears to have been a bright, plucky, intelligent boy. Regimental
schools were not in those days; but through the kindness of his captain
he picked up some education, and after serving in the Channel Islands,
at the Cape, and in India, found himself, in the year 1804, a young
sergeant in the Grenadier company, which was detached with the grand
army under Lord Lake fighting against the Mahrattas. He was one of the
stormers at the capture of Deig, on December 24, 1804, and led the
"forlorn-hope" of the storming column in _three_ out of the four
desperate, but unsuccessful, assaults on Bhurtpore in January-February,
1805, receiving severe wounds upon each occasion. Lord Lake rewarded his
daring with an ensigncy in the 65th Foot. A few weeks later he was
promoted to lieutenant in the 76th Foot, both commissions being dated
March 10, 1805. With the 76th Shipp returned home in 1807; but he
speedily found himself in pecuniary difficulties, and sold out of the
army on March 19, 1808. His commissions having been given "without
purchase," he was only entitled to £100 for each twelve months of actual
commissioned service abroad, and £50 for like periods at home, up to the
full value--£700. With the small sum so realized he paid his debts, and
soon after found himself alone in London, without a shilling in the
world.

Seeing, as he tells us, no reason why he should not rise again as he had
done before, Shipp enlisted into the 24th light Dragoons, which he had
known in Lake's army; returned to India to join that regiment; and in
the course of a few years rose to the position of regimental
sergeant-major. In 1815 he was appointed by the Marquis of Hastings
(Earl of Moira), then Governor-general and Commander-in-chief in India,
to an ensigncy in the 87th Prince's Own Irish, better known under its
later name of the 87th Royal Irish Fusiliers, the first battalion of
which landed at Calcutta from Mauritius in August that year. Shipp's
commission bore the original date of the vacancy, May 4, 1815; but by an
omission, then not uncommon in the case of Indian appointments, he was
not gazetted at home until some time later, and his name never appeared
in the Army List until May, 1819. Shipp had thus twice won a commission
from the ranks by the time he was little more than thirty years old--an
achievement which may be regarded as unique in the annals of the British
army.

Shipp served with the 87th in the second campaign of the Ghoorkha War,
and distinguished himself by a single combat with one of the enemy's
sirdars in the action near Muckwanpore. He also served at the siege of
Hattrass, where he was the first to enter the fort, and was wounded in
the hand. He was on the staff of the left division of the grand army
under the Marquis of Hastings in the Mahratta and Pindaree War of
1817-18, during which he distinguished himself on several occasions. He
became a lieutenant in the 87th on July 5, 1821.

At the latter end of this year a series of unfortunate occurrences
began, which brought Shipp's military career to an untimely close. He
appears to have entered into a racing partnership with Lieut.-Colonel
Browne, of the same regiment, to run horses at Cawnpore races. Shipp,
who was supposed to be a good judge of horseflesh, was to make certain
purchases, for the purpose, at Calcutta. Colonel Browne, who died in
command of the regiment in Burmah a few years afterwards, was then one
of the regimental majors. He was a brave officer and, it is said, much
liked in the regiment; but it does not seem to have occurred to him or
any one else that to encourage a junior officer in Shipp's position--a
moneyless man, with family ties--to embark in turf speculations was a
most unfriendly action. The partners speedily fell out, each accusing
the other of "throwing him over." Browne claimed 2,000 rupees from
Shipp, which the latter admitted he had not the means to pay; and Shipp
then accused Browne of prejudicing the minds of the other officers
against him. This state of things continued until Shipp had a
misunderstanding with a civilian at Calcutta, in consequence of which
his brother officers treated him with marked coolness. Whether there
were sufficient grounds for so doing does not appear; but when Shipp
asked that his conduct in the matter might be investigated by
court-martial--the only course open to an officer without the means to
go to the civil courts--he was told that the Judge Advocate-General
considered it unnecessary. Worried by pecuniary difficulties, and
smarting under what he considered undeserved treatment by his former
associates, which he attributed to the hostile influence of Colonel
Browne, Shipp wrote some intemperate letters reflecting on the conduct
of Colonel Browne and of the regimental commanding officer. These he
stubbornly refused to withdraw; although in after years he admitted that
they were unjust and written under a misapprehension of facts. The
inevitable result followed. Shipp was brought before an European
General Court Martial on specific charges of unofficer-like conduct. The
court, of which Colonel Baldock, 29th Bengal Native Infantry, was
president, assembled at Fort William on July 14, 1823, and after
thirteen days' sitting found Shipp guilty of both the charges of
unofficer-like conduct preferred against him, and sentenced him to be
"discharged" from the service; but, at the same time, strongly
recommended him to mercy in consideration of his past services and
wounds, and the high character as an officer and a gentleman that he had
previously borne. The proceedings of the court were sent home for
confirmation, and eighteen months later were returned with the
notification that Shipp was to be permitted to retire from the service.
He accordingly returned home, and sold out of the regiment on November
3, 1825, about a month after his arrival in England. With their
customary generosity, the Court of Directors of the late East India
Company settled upon him a life pension of £50 a year, in consideration
of his Indian services.

Disappointed again and again in his hopes of obtaining civil employment,
Shipp tried his hand at authorship, and wrote a work entitled the
"Military Bijou," and other things. In 1829 he published "Memoirs of the
Extraordinary Military Career of John Shipp." The book was brought out
by the late Mr. Hurst, of Great Marlborough Street, and proved a
literary success. As a military critic observed at the time, "that a
friendless farmer's boy, ignorant, by his own admission, of the simplest
rudiments of education, and following the engrossing profession of a
soldier from an age scarcely beyond the pale of childhood, should have
qualified himself to be at once the hero and the author of so remarkable
a work argues no ordinary qualities in the individual." A no less
creditable feature, we may be permitted to add, is the fine, soldierly
sense of duty, which led Shipp to bow to his fate (p. 317), and to
abstain from making his autobiography a vehicle for either
self-exculpation or recrimination in regard of the matters that proved
the ruin of his professional life. Two years after the publication of
his memoirs, Shipp wrote a pamphlet entitled, "Flogging and its
Substitutes--A Voice from the Ranks." It was in the form of a letter to
the late Sir Francis Burdett, Bart., M.P., who in return sent the author
a douceur of £60. Shipp's views did not find general acceptance in
military circles at the time; but the substitutes for corporal
punishment which he advocated, including a system of pecuniary fines for
various military offences, have all been since adopted in the army, and
are now in force. About the same time the late Sir Charles Rowan,
K.C.B., then Colonel Rowan, one of the Commissioners of the new
Metropolitan Police, offered Shipp an inspectorship in the Stepney
division, which was gladly accepted. Subsequently he received the
appointment of Superintendent of the Night Watch at Liverpool. There he
proved himself a most capable and efficient officer. So highly, indeed,
was he esteemed in the borough, that when he offered himself for the
mastership of the Liverpool Workhouse, early in the year 1833, he was
elected to the post by an overwhelming majority of votes. The
comfortable competency thus assured to him he did not live long to
enjoy. An attack of pleurisy, after a few days of acute suffering,
carried him off on February 27, 1834, at the age of fifty-two.

His "Memoirs," as already stated, first appeared in 1829. A reprint, by
the same publisher, appeared in 1840. Subsequently another edition, in
which the summary of the court-martial proceedings and some other matter
contained in the original edition were omitted, and a supplementary
chapter added, bringing down the narrative to the date of Shipp's death,
was issued by the late Mr. Tegg, publisher, 73, Cheapside, London, in
1843. The present volume is a reprint of the latter work, the text of
which has been reproduced in full, and, save as regards the correction
of some obvious typographical errors, without alteration. A very few
explanatory footnotes have been added, and some illustrations, from
authentic contemporary sources, have been introduced, which it is hoped
will lend additional interest to the story of the "Extraordinary
Military Career of John Shipp."

                                                H. MANNERS CHICHESTER.

    LONDON, 1890.


FOOTNOTES:

[1] See the picture of East Anglian rural life given by the Rev. Dr.
Jessopp in _Nineteenth Century_ for May, 1882, under the title, "The
Arcady of our Grandfathers."




PREFACE.


In laying before the public a familiar and unreserved detail of the
incidents and adventures of my past life, I trust it will not for a
moment be supposed that I am actuated by vanity, or by a desire to make
an ostentatious display of my military services. That, in the course of
those services, I have exercised some degree of daring, to the merit (if
any) attached to which I may justly lay claim, I do not affect to deny;
but it is far, very far, from my thoughts, to assume the possession of
uncommon fortitude, or to arrogate to myself any degree of heroism
superior to that which would be displayed, on occasions which required
it, by every brave officer in his Majesty's service.

Having thus, first, disclaimed all intention of boasting of my
performances, or of holding myself up as a prodigy of valour, it becomes
me next to declare that I do not pretend to afford the reader any
important intelligence respecting our Indian possessions, either as
regards statistics or politics. Information on these subjects must be
sought in the works of writers of far higher pretensions than the humble
author of these Memoirs.

My design has been to present the public with a simple and unadorned
narration of my own life, from the period of my infancy to the date of
my having been, unfortunately, compelled to quit his Majesty's service.

If, among the anecdotes which I have introduced, the eye of criticism
may detect many which may be deemed of too trivial a nature, and devoid
of that piquancy which can alone confer a value on such light and
unimportant materials, I can only plead that I may have been led to
over-estimate their merit, from the hearty laughter which they created
when they were first noted by me; and I trust it will be recollected
that it is a rough soldier who has ventured to think them worthy of
publicity. So, also, if in my account of the battles and sieges in which
I have had the honour to participate, my details shall appear flimsy or
meagre, more especially as concerns the objects of the government of
India in the various campaigns in which I have been engaged, be it
remembered that I do not profess to know their designs; that my constant
occupation in my professional duties afforded me no time to study them;
and that it is the subaltern's duty to act, and not to reason.

My Memoirs, such as they are, I leave to the indulgent consideration of
a liberal public.

                                                     JOHN SHIPP.

    BHURTPORE COTTAGE,
    ALPHA ROAD, REGENT'S PARK,
    _January, 1829_.




MEMOIRS OF JOHN SHIPP.




CHAPTER I.


In the ponderous mouldy register of the little market-town of
Saxmundham, in the county of Suffolk--covered with the red remnants of
the old worn-out velvet pulpit-cushion of the said village church, into
which the Christian religion had been beaten and enforced, both with
clenched fist and pointed elbow, and which now plainly told the
congregation that it had at last yielded only to Parson Brown's
impressive manner and arguments--in this prodigious volume, protected by
huge brass clasps, which naught but the rough hand of the man of
skulls[2] could force to obedience, after the oft-wetted thumb had
aroused some hundreds of gigantic leaves from their peaceful slumber,
and the book had opened wide its time-worn pages, there was, and, I
doubt not, is still to be discovered, a plainly-written record, setting
forth, in most intelligible terms, that I, John Shipp, the humble author
of these Memoirs, came into this wicked and untoward generation on the
16th day of March, A.D. 1785. If this register be an authentic
enrolment, which I have neither reason nor inclination to doubt, I was
the second son of Thomas and Lætitia Shipp--persons of honest fame, but
in indigent circumstances, who had both "drank deep" of the cup of
sorrow. Of the latter of those dear parents I was bereft in my infancy;
and, as my father was a soldier in a foreign clime, thus was I thrown on
the world's tempestuous ocean, to buffet with the waves of care, and to
encounter the breakers of want.

At the death of my poor mother I was left, with my elder brother, in
utter destitution. The advantage which other children derive from the
support and good counsel of an affectionate father, we had never known;
and we were now suddenly bereft of a fond mother's fostering care, and
with it, of our humble parental home. Where, under such circumstances,
could we look for protection? Friends we had few, if any; and those who
might have been generously disposed to assist us were, unfortunately,
incapacitated, by their own distressed circumstances, from extending a
helping hand towards us. Need I feel shame, then, in avowing that there
was one place of refuge, and one place only, in which two helpless
orphans could obtain, at once, food, clothes, and shelter; and that that
one asylum was the village poorhouse!

At the age of nine I was deprived of my brother, who was pressed on
board a man-of-war. He was a remarkably fine youth of about fourteen;
and, being of a wild spirited disposition, I have every reason to
believe that but little _pressing_ was required to induce him to go to
sea; but rather, that being, like myself, homeless and dependent, he
gladly availed himself of the opportunity which offered of setting his
youthful heart free from bondage, by becoming a volunteer in the
service of his country. Since that period--now upwards of thirty
years--I have never heard of him!

To return to my own Memoirs: now that my brother had left me, I was
desolate indeed! His departure afflicted me most sincerely, and I felt
myself alone in the wide world, a friendless isolated being. But the
spirits of childhood, buoyant and elastic, though they may be depressed
for a time, readily accommodate themselves to all exigencies, and rise
superior to the greatest calamities. Grief, however poignant at first,
will not dwell long with youth; and the ingenuity and curiosity of a boy
ever on the alert to discover some new expedient with which to amuse his
mind and to gratify his fickle fancy, effectually prevent him from
indulging in unavailing despondency. I was naturally a wild dog, of an
active unconquerable spirit; and although the miseries peculiar to my
friendless situation could not but at first severely affect me, yet,
after a short time, I found that, in spite of them all, I had so
contrived it as to have established in the village a character for
mischief infinitely superior to that possessed by any other boy of my
own age. This character, however reverenced by boys of the same genius,
was not, it must be acknowledged, very likely to increase the number of
my real friends; and I therefore cannot speak in very rapturous terms of
the comforts I enjoyed at this period of my youth. I have a recollection
of sundry tricks and misdemeanours in which I was very actively
concerned, and for which I was frequently as deservedly punished; and,
as far as my memory serves me, my time, just at this juncture, was
passed in a pretty even routine of planning and executing mischief, and
receiving its reward.

This, however, was not long to last; for fickle fortune threw an
incident in my way, which diverted my attention from all my former
tricks and frolics, and turned my thoughts into a new channel. One
autumn's morning, in the year 1794, while I was playing marbles in a
lane called Love Lane, and was in the very act of having a shot at the
whole ring with my blood-alley, the shrill notes of a fife, and the
hollow sound of a distant drum, struck on my active ear. I stopped my
shot, bagged my marbles, and scampered off to see the soldiers. On
arriving at the market-place, I found them to be a recruiting party of
the Royal Artillery, who had already enlisted several likely-looking
fellows. The pretty little well-dressed fifer was the principal object
of my notice. His finery and shrill music were of themselves sufficient
attractions to my youthful fancy; but what occupied my thoughts more
than either of these was the size of this musical warrior, whose height
very little exceeded that of the drum by which he stood. "Surely,"
thought I to myself, sidling up to him, "I must be myself as tall, if
not taller, than this little blade, and should make as good a soldier!"
Reflections of this nature were crowding thick into my mind when the
portly sergeant, addressing his words to the gaping rustics by whom he
was surrounded, but directing his eyes to the bed-room windows in the
vicinity of his station, commenced a right royal speech. I swallowed
every word spoken by the royal sergeant, with as much avidity as the
drum-major's wife would her morning libation. It was all about
"gentlemen soldiers," "merry life," "muskets rattling," "cannons
roaring," "drums beating," "colours flying," "regiments charging," and
shouts of "victory! victory!" On hearing these last words, the rustic
bumpkins who had enlisted exposed their flowing locks, and with their
tattered hats gave three cheers to "the king--God bless him." In this I
most heartily joined, to the no small amusement of the assembled
multitude. "Victory!" seemed still to ring in my ears, and the sound
inspired my little heart with such enthusiasm, that it was not until
some minutes after the rest had left off cheering, that I became
conscious, from the merriment around me, that I still held my tiny hat
elevated in the air, waiting for a repetition of that spirit-stirring
word. Finding myself observed, I adjusted my hat with a knowing air,
elevated my beardless chin with as much consequence as I could assume,
and, raising myself on tiptoe, to appear as tall as possible, I strutted
up to the sergeant, and asked him, in plain words, if he would "take I
for a sodger?" The sergeant smiled, and patted my head in so
condescending a manner, that I thought I might venture to take the same
liberty with the head of the drum; but in this I was mistaken, for I had
no sooner touched it than I received from the drummer a pretty sharp rap
on the knuckles for my presumption: his drum-head was as sacred to him
as the apple of his eye. I again mounted on tiptoe and urged my
question, "Will you like I for a sodger?" intimating, at the same time,
that I was "bigger than that there chap," pointing to the little fifer.
Incensed at this indignity, the boy of notes was so nettled, that he
commenced forthwith to impress on my face and head striking marks of his
irritation in being thus degradingly referred to. This I felt that I
could have returned with compound interest; but, as my antagonist had
the honour of wearing his Majesty's livery, I deemed it wiser to pocket
the affront, with my marbles, and make the best of my way off. I
accordingly made a retrograde movement towards home, full of the scene I
had just witnessed, and vociferating, as I went along, "Left, right;"
"Right, left;" "Heads up, soldiers;" "Eyes right;" "Eyes left," &c. In
short, I had thus suddenly not only been touched by the military, but
got the military touch; and from that day forth I could neither say nor
do anything, but in what I thought a soldier-like style: my play
consisted chiefly of evolutions and manoeuvres, and my conversation of
military phrases.

Shortly after this adventure, I was sent to live with a farmer in the
town, whose heart was as cold as the hoar-frost which often blighted his
fairest prospects. Fortunately for me, however, his wife was of a
different disposition. This good dame proved almost a second mother to
me, and frequently screened me from the effects of my master's rage;
but so restless and untoward (to say the truth) were my inclinations
and propensities, and so imperious in his commands, and unrelenting in
his anger, was my master, that in spite of my kind mistress's
intercession in my favour, I seldom passed a day without being subjected
to his cruel lash. This treatment was but little calculated either to
conciliate my affections, or to effect a reformation in my conduct. My
feelings became hardened under the lash of oppression; and my desire to
leave a place so little congenial with my disposition increased daily.
Meantime, all the cats and dogs in my master's house were made to go
through military evolutions; the hoes and rakes were transformed into
muskets, and the geese and turkeys into soldiers. Even my master's whip,
which was always in requisition at the conclusion of these performances,
could not eradicate my propensity for "soldiering." Every time his back
was turned, my military exercises were resumed; and when I could not by
possibility find time to be thus actively engaged, I solaced myself with
whistling, "God save the King," "The British Grenadiers," and "See, the
conquering hero comes." The first of these tunes I once commenced in the
churchyard, during a funeral service; for which I got the sexton's cane
over my back; "that being no place," as the said sexton judiciously
remarked, "to show my loyalty in." Even the old women in the parish
could not pass me without a military salute, such as "Heads up, missis!"
"Eyes right, missis!" "Keep the step, missis!" &c. These pranks often
brought me into disgrace and trouble, and usually ended with an
application of the end of my master's whip.

In the dreary month of December, when the white snow danced along the
glen, and the icicle sparkled on the hoary oak, I had transported my
frozen limbs into a turnip field, close by the Great Yarmouth road,
where I stood shrivelled up like a dried mushroom, plotting and planning
how to escape from the truly wretched situation in which I felt myself
to be then placed. I had just put my cold fingers into my mouth, for
the purpose of warming them, and had given them the first puff, when I
heard the distant sound of martial music. Down went my hands, and up
went my heels. I made an _echellon_ movement towards the place; jumped
over the gate; brought up my right shoulder a little; then gave the word
"Forward," and marched in double quick time. The music soon got nearer;
or, at all events, I soon got so near to the music that I was glad to
halt. Just at this moment the whole band struck up "Over the hills, and
far away," which kindled a flame in my bosom which nothing but death can
extinguish, though I have now long since had my full share of the
reality of the Scotch melody. On coming up to the party of soldiers, I
gave the colonel a military salute, by first slapping my leathers, then
bringing up my right hand (which, by the by, was the wrong hand) to my
forehead, and extending the thumb as far as I could from my fingers. I
continued in this position, keeping my elbow parallel with the top of my
head, until the colonel came close up to me; and, remarking how
studiously I retained the same position, condescendingly said, with a
smile, "That's a fine fellow." On this head I perfectly agreed with the
gallant commandant, as may be readily supposed; and the compliment so
elated me, that I felt by no means certain whether I stood on my head or
my heels; but ran about, first in the front, then in the rear, until at
last I ran bump up against "master," who presented himself to my
astonished eyes, mounted on Corporal Dash (a horse of his I had so
named), with a long hunting whip (a very old friend of mine) in his
hand. The moment I recognized these old acquaintances, I saw that I had
not a minute to lose; so, making up my mind that a good retreat was far
better than a bad fight, I ran off at full charge, as fast as my legs
would carry me, my master riding after me, and roaring out most lustily,
"Stop! stop!" If, instead of "Stop," he had said "Halt," it is more than
probable that my legs would instinctively have obeyed; for, from the
constant drills to which they had been subjected, they began to move
quite mechanically. As it was, however, on I went, until a stile brought
my master up; when, as I was quite out of breath, I thought I might as
well halt too. Here I had the satisfaction of hearing my master swear
roundly, that he would kill me when he caught me. "Thank God," thought I
to myself, "you have not got me yet." The moment my persecutor rode on,
I cut across a field, and again gained the head of the corps of Royal
Horse Artillery, who were at this time just entering the suburbs of the
village. Here I dared not venture to follow them any farther, until my
master's hurricane had blown over; so I mounted a gate, where my heart
yearned after them, as that of a wounded soldier does after his corps in
the battle's heat. Here I again set my wits to work how to elude the
chastisement I was sure to receive from the infuriated man of clods. The
regiment which I had seen was, I had ascertained, on its march to
Yarmouth, to embark for foreign service; and, from the condescending
manner of the colonel (who returned my salute), I made no doubt whatever
that he would be glad to take me for a soldier. Full of these thoughts,
I loitered about all day, but dared not venture in, until, at length, my
interior began to express wants respecting which I had not before
reflected. These demands were of a nature not to be drilled into
obedience; so, at last, overcome by fatigue and inanition, in I marched,
having first seen my master march out. My mistress, who was ever ready
to act the part of a kind mother towards me, soon provided me with a
substantial meal. I was not long in doing justice to the repast thus
kindly set before me; and, having effectually satisfied my appetite for
the time present, I took the precaution of lining my pockets with a
large hunch of bread and cheese, to subsist on the following day, when I
intended to be in light marching order to follow the soldiers. Having
thus prudently provided in some degree for the future, I betook myself
to my usual occupations; but I had not commenced work more than five
minutes, when I espied my master reconnoitring me from behind a hedge.
Presently he crossed a stile with a large whip in his hand; and I could
discern, from his artful movements, that it was his intention to come
upon me unperceived. Now and then, in order that my fears might not be
excited, he would stoop down and pull a turnip; but I was too good a
soldier myself to be out-generalled in this manner. I stood from my
work, the better to observe the enemy's movements, and kept my eye upon
the fugleman. At last, I saw him make preparations to arrange his whip;
so I immediately arranged my legs for a start. "Every step that he now
takes," thought I to myself, "is a step nearer to my back; whereas, now
that I have ten yards' start, there is still a chance for me." My master
perceived that I was ready for a bolt, and soon broke from slow time
into quick, and from quick to double quick, which put me to the charge,
my master following me--swearing, threatening, and roaring out, "Stop
him! stop him!" a second time. I turned round to look who was likely to
stop me, when my foot came in contact with a large clod, and I tumbled
heels over head. Here the chase ended; for my tyrant caught hold of me
by a smock-frock which I had on, and commenced flogging me; but, from
the race I had given him, I found he was so winded, that he had not
strength left to hurt me much; so I "showed fight" at once, by seizing
hold of the lash of the whip. This so enraged him, that he threw me from
him with such violence, that one side of the smock-frock and I parted
company, and I had just sufficient time left me to get up again and make
my escape, which I did, leaving my master, as a token of my unalterable
affection, the one side of my upper garment. Let it be his
winding-sheet, for he was a cruel monster!

The remaining half of my smock-frock I stuck in a hedge in the same
field, as a further token of my regard, and as a proof of my anxiety to
leave him all I could spare. I then made a movement towards the town, in
the hope that I should see the colonel, but he was not to be found; and
I went from public-house to public-house, in search of the soldiers,
till night began to unfold her sombre mantle, which was as gloomy as my
poor little friendless bosom. Go home I dared not; so, after wandering
about the farmer's house, I at last got into the stable, and slept all
night in the hay-loft, dreaming I was a general, and riding over the
battle's plain. Here I slept as sound as a dead soldier, until I was
awoke in the morning by the gruff voice of my master, inquiring if they
had seen anything of me, and protesting that, whenever he caught me, he
would skin me alive. "Bob" (one of his men), he bellowed out, "saddle
that there old horse, Corporal Dash, and I'll go and see where he is;
and, if I catches him, I'll put him in the stocks, and see if that can't
cool his courage for him. He is the most tarnationest and outdationest
lad I have ever seen: it was only the day before yesterday that I
catched him riding the old sow, Polly, with a pitchfork, and singing
out, 'Victory! victory!' but I'll see if the stocks won't cool him." The
old corporal was saddled accordingly, and led out. I could distinctly
see him through a small hole in the loft, and he trotted off towards the
market-place. I now began to think what place was best and safest for
me. Skinning alive I could not bear the thoughts of; and, as to the
stocks, it is true they might have cooled me, for it was freezing hard,
and as bitter a morning as ever blew from the heavens; but there was
nothing soldier-like in the situation, and the thoughts of such a
position were not to be endured.

As soon as Bob had left the place to go to his work, I began to form
plans for my retreat. Resolved, for the present, to act on the
defensive, I first reconnoitred the course, to see that the enemy was
not lying in ambush for me, or lurking in the vicinity of my
hiding-place. Finding all clear, I descended to the stable, and soon
gained the road. Having passed through the barn-yard and orchard, I
peeped in at the farmhouse, but could not catch a glimpse of my kind
mistress. My bread and cheese I had eaten the preceding evening, and my
stomach began now to evince symptoms of mutinous commotion; but the fear
of falling again into the hands of my merciless enemy prevailed over all
other considerations, and, in an adjoining field, I regaled myself very
contentedly on a turnip. I had just concluded that sumptuous repast, and
was beginning to reflect seriously on the situation in which I had
placed myself, when the band struck up that beautiful old melody, "The
girl I left behind me." This was both meat and drink to me, and its
sweet notes comforted my lately inconsolable bowels. I put myself in
marching and soldier-like attitude; and, with my hands stuck close to my
leathers, my fingers directed towards the earth, chin elevated, toes
pointed, thus I stepped off with the left leg, keeping time with the
tune, until I arrived at the toll-gate, about a quarter of a mile from
the town. Here I could not help halting, to look back on the little
place of my birth, the scene of my boyhood, and many a sportive hour. I
found the tear trickling down my cheek. It was near the grave of my fond
mother, too. I hesitated, for some time, whether to proceed or return;
but my master's dreadful threat rushed upon my mind in all its terror,
and this impelled me onwards; and I again joined the followers, men and
boys, girls and dogs. I was but a child, but I was a child cast upon the
world, parentless, and in the hands of a cruel master. I could not
believe it possible to be worse off, and therefore continued my march
towards Yarmouth, without a mouthful of bread to eat, or a penny in my
pocket. I knew not a soul in the place to which I was going; but my
truant disposition took a hop, step, and jump over all difficulties.

My worldly effects consisted of a hat, which had once been round, but
which, from my continually turning and twisting it into the shape of
cocked-hats, road-hats, soldiers' caps, &c., was now any shape you
wished; a little fustian jacket; waistcoat of the same material; a
coarse shirt, which, from a violent shaking fit, was completely in rags;
a pair of leathers, intolerably fat and greasy; ribbed worsted
stockings; and a thwacking pair of high-lows, nailed from heel to toe.
These, with a little stick, were my only incumbrances, save a gloomy
prospect. I was bitterly hungry, and sadly tired; but on I went until we
arrived within a mile of Beccles, some sixteen miles from home. Here
some of the soldiers branched off to their quarters in the vicinity of
the town; but I followed the greater body, as the more probable means of
getting something to eat. The band now again struck up, "Over the hills,
and far away." I marched at the head, but began to find that my poor
craving stomach could no longer feed upon delicious melody; so I now
made up my mind to accost the colonel, and ask him if he could not
enlist me for a soldier. The colonel seemed a kind-hearted man; so, as
modesty on my part was now quite out of the question, I bent my way to
the head inn, where all the officers were assembled. I inquired for the
colonel, and was at last shown into a room where he was sitting, with
other officers, at breakfast. I strutted up to him with my hat in my
hand, and made him a most obsequious bow, with my hand and foot at the
same time. I then stood straight, as if I had swallowed a sergeant's
pike; when the colonel laughingly said, "Well, my fine little rustic,
what's your pleasure?" I said, making another bow, and scraping the
carpet with my nailed high-lows, "Soldiering, your honour." At this, the
whole of the officers burst into a roar of laughter, in which the
colonel most heartily joined. I thought it was the fashion in the army,
so I joined them, which only served to increase their mirth; and many of
them were obliged to hold their sides from excess of laughter. I soon
found that all this merriment was at my expense; at which I began to
evince some slight displeasure, and was just about to express it in
words, when the colonel said, in the most affectionate manner, "My dear
little child, you had better return to your fond mother's lap." Here I
could not help piping, and I replied, "Sir, my mother is dead." "Could I
even take you," continued the colonel, "I should imagine that I was
robbing some fond parent of its child; besides, we are proceeding on
foreign service, against the enemy."

This news only served to increase my anxiety to go, and I again
entreated him to look with compassion upon an orphan. I saw him turn
from me, and wipe away a falling tear; and then, addressing me with the
affection of a parent, he said, "My dear little fellow, if I was going
to remain in England, I would take you; but under the present
circumstances, I cannot." Here I again began to cry, and I told him that
I was sixteen miles from home, and had not got a piece of bread to put
in my mouth. Upon this, the whole of the officers vociferated, "Waiter!
waiter! waiter!" The waiter was speedily in attendance, when I was
ordered breakfast by twenty persons at the same time. I was still
resolved not to give up my point; but the colonel again told me, it
would be impossible for him to take me, but assured me that I should be
taken care of, and desired me to go downstairs and get my breakfast. I
did so, and, in passing round the table for the purpose of retiring,
some gave me a shilling, some sixpence, so that I had more money than I
had ever before possessed in my life. I ate a hearty breakfast in the
kitchen, the servants asking me a number of impertinent questions. After
breakfast, I counted my riches, and found that I had ten shillings, at
least, in my leathers, into the pockets of which I every moment
introduced my hand, to feel if all was safe. In the afternoon I was
ordered dinner, and at last placed in the charge of a sergeant, who
inquired who and what I was. I slept with him, and slept most soundly
too, thinking I was a soldier. Early the next morning I was awoke, when
the sergeant showed me a note from the good-natured colonel to my
master, whose name and address he had pumped me out of the evening
before. The sergeant was proceeding to Woodbridge Barracks, and he had
directions to take me over to my master, as well as to deliver the
colonel's note, which was open, and contained a most earnest request
that, for his sake, my master would not flog me. The generous colonel
had also given the sergeant five shillings for me, which he gave me
before I started from Beccles. About three o'clock in the afternoon I
arrived at my master's, who was at home. The kind message of the colonel
was communicated to him, and he faithfully promised the sergeant, that
all should be forgiven and forgotten. I was lured, under this promise,
to return to my work, resolved to do better in future; and I began to
think that I really had not much reason to complain; for, on counting my
money, I found I had fifteen shillings and sixpence left, after treating
the sergeant on the way home. Scarcely, however, had the sun risen on
the following day, when my master seized me by the neck, and dragged my
clothes off my back. He had with him a double-handed whip, such as is
used by colliers, and with this he lashed me so unmercifully, that I
have no hesitation in saying, that, had not a man, who was labouring in
an adjoining field, interfered, he would have killed me. He was the most
inhuman man I ever saw; and if he was not dead, and his family in abject
poverty, I should, before this, have published his name; but, not to add
to their present calamities, I will bury such feelings with their
father, and begin a fresh chapter, with accounts more interesting to my
readers; first entreating their forgiveness for having dwelt so long on
the scenes of my boyhood.

[Illustration]

[Illustration]

FOOTNOTES:

[2] The sexton of the parish.




CHAPTER II.


About this period (1797) the three experimental regiments[3] were
ordered to be formed, viz., the 22nd, 34th, and 65th regiments; the
former at Colchester. I was, one morning in that year, about the month
of January or February, busily employed in a field close by my master's
house, when, who should I see but one of the parish officers making
towards me, with a large paper in his hand. I began to muster and parade
my crimes, but found, on a fair review, that I had done nothing that
merited the interference of an officer; so I stood up boldly till he
approached me, and smilingly said, "Shipp, I have frequently heard of,
and observed your great wish to go for a soldier." He then read the
paragraph, and asked me if I was willing to go; for that, if I was, the
parish would rig me out decently, and that he would take me to
Colchester. My little heart was in my mouth; I repeated his words,
"Willing to go!" and eagerly assured him of the rapture with which I
accepted his offer. The affair was soon concluded; so down went my
shovel, and off I marched, whistling, "See, the conquering hero comes."
By four o'clock of the same day, to the honour and praise of the parish
be it spoken, I was rigged out in my new leather tights, new coat, new
hat, new shoes, new everything--of which I was not a little proud. I
begged, as a particular favour, that I might sport colours in my hat;
and even this was permitted to my vanity, as long as I remained in the
town. I took an affectionate leave of all my old playfellows and my good
mistress; and even my cruel master was not neglected by me, for I never
had malice or unforgiveness in my disposition. The next day, by seven
o'clock in the morning, I was on my way to Colchester; and, when I was
seated on the front seat of the coach, I would not have exchanged
situations with the grand pasha of Egypt, or the king upon the throne of
that land of which I was a native. Scarcely had I seated myself, and
adjusted my feet in a safe situation, than I indulged my coach
companions by whistling several martial airs; but, coming to a
well-known turn of the road, from which you take the farewell peep at
Saxmundham, as much as I loved my king, I stopped short in the middle of
the national anthem, and my eye bent its way instinctively towards my
native village, where I first saw the light of heaven, and rested on the
little village spire, which reared its Gothic head over the remains of
my poor mother. Towards this painfully interesting object I looked and
looked, till the place of my nativity was buried from my sight by the
surrounding trees. When bereft of this view, I felt pensive and sad, and
could only console myself by reflecting, that I did not fly from my
parental roof; nor was I deserting aged parents, or unprotected sisters,
for I had no one to bewail my departure. Yet I could not help feeling
that I left something behind me that hung like a magnet to my heart;
with all my misfortunes, all my cares and troubles, still I could not
quit, without a pang, the place of my birth, and the tomb of my beloved
mother. At last, three gentlemen on the coach, having heard my history
from the person who accompanied me, cheered me up by saying, that they
knew the corps I was going to, and that they were all lads like myself.
This notice from strangers so enlivened me, that I began to regard
myself as no small personage, and I talked as much as any of them, until
we arrived at an inn in Colchester, where we dined. Here I was marched
off to the colonel of the corps in which I was to serve; from the
colonel to the adjutant; from the adjutant to the sergeant-major; from
the sergeant-major to the drum-major; and thence to his wife, an old
drunken Irish woman, but as good a creature as ever drank whisky. In the
custody of this lady, the friend who came with me left me, first giving
me a hearty shake of the hand, and wishing me every happiness. I must
confess I felt now quite deserted: about twenty boys gathered round me,
and I soon found that my fine leathers were the subject of their
ridicule and laughter; some of them crying out, "Bill, twig his
leathers!"--"Smoke his new coat!"--"My eye! what a buck!"--"Some
gemman's son, I suppose, run away from his daddy!"--"Never mind," said
another, "we'll soon drill his leathers into hot rolls and butter." Here
my friend Maggy, the Irish woman, interposed her aid in my behalf.
"Arrah!" said she, "what are you gazing at, you set of spalpeens, you?
Be off, you set of thaves, or I will be after breaking some of your
nasty dirty mugs for you. Arrah! don't mind them; sure they are nothing
at all but a set of monkeys just catched. Come here, honey, and let me
see who will be after laying a finger on you." Here she seated me by her
side, rubbed my chin, patted my back, eyed my coat and breeches, and
asked me if I had got any pence in my pocket, with which she should get
me some hot rolls and butter, for _ta_. I gave her a shilling, and she
brought two rolls and butter. The residue I suppose she spent in gin,
for she began to give me some of her Irish hugs; so much so, that I
wished myself at a greater distance. One of the boys cried out, "Ask for
the change--ask her for the change, or she will do you." At this
imputation Maggy got on her legs, and, seizing a large trencher,
tottered, or rather staggered, towards the boy, and exclaimed, "You
great big blackguard, you, do you want to rob me of my name? Take that,
and bad luck to you!" Here she hurled the trencher at him, but the
effort carried old Maggy off her legs, and she exhibited her gigantic
figure on the floor, to the amusement of all the barrack. I could not
help laughing heartily, though I found I had got among a queer set; when
the drum-major entering, and seeing his wife on the floor, vociferated,
"Get up, you old drunken hag; or, by St. Patrick! and that's no small
oath, but I'll pay you off." Here Maggy made an effort to rise, but the
drop had done her up; and I was obliged to give her a helping hand, and
she was put to bed, clothes and all.

[Illustration: SAXMUNDHAM CHURCH]

On the following morning I was taken to a barber's, and deprived of my
curly brown locks. My hair curled beautifully, but in a minute my poor
little head was nearly bald, except a small patch behind, which was
reserved for a future operation. I was then paraded to the tailor's
shop, and deprived of my new clothes--coat, leathers, and hat--for which
I received, in exchange, red jacket, red waistcoat, red pantaloons, and
red foraging-cap. The change, or metamorphosis, was so complete, that I
could hardly imagine it to be the same dapper little fellow. I was
exceedingly tall for a boy of ten years of age; but, notwithstanding
this, my clothes were much too large: my sleeves were two or three
inches over my hands, or rather longer than my fingers; and the whole
hung on me, to use a well-known expression, like a purser's shirt on a
hand-spike. My pride was humbled, my spirits drooped, and I followed the
drum-major, hanging my head like a felon going to the place of
execution. I cut such a queer figure, that all who met me turned round
and stared at me. At last, I mustered up courage enough to ask one
little chap what he was staring at, when he replied, "Ask my eye, Johnny
Raw;" at the same time adding his extended fingers and thumb to the
length of his nose. Passing some drummers on their way to practice, I
got finely roasted. "Twig the raw-skin!"--"Smoke his pantaloons!"--"Them
there trousers is what I calls a knowing cut!"--"Look at the sign of the
Red Man!" &c., &c. Under this kind of file-firing I reached my barrack,
where I was doomed to undergo the same routine of quizzing, till at
length I got nettled, and told one of the boys, if he did not let me
alone, I should take the liberty of giving him a good threshing. This
"pluck," as they termed it, silenced most of my tormentors, and I was
permitted, for a time, to remain unmolested. In this interval the
drum-major went out, having first put my leathers, &c., into his box, of
which he took the key. I sat myself down on a stool, which might not
inaptly have been styled the stool of repentance; for here I began first
to think that soldiering did not possess quite so much delight as I had
pictured to myself. Still I resolved to put a good face on the matter,
and so mixed with my comrades, and in an hour was as free and as much at
home with them all as if I had known them for years. The drift of my new
acquaintances, in being thus easily familiar with me, was soon apparent;
for one of the knowing ones among them called me aside, and asked me if
I knew where to sell my coloured clothes; as, if not, he would go with
me, and show me. I told him that the drum-major had them. "Yes," replied
he, "I know he has; but you see as how he has no business with them.
Them there traps should be sold, and you get the money they brings; and
if you don't keep your eye on the fugleman, he will do you out of half
of them." He further said, that, when he enlisted, he got more than five
shillings for his things. I replied, that of course the drum-major would
either sell them for my benefit, or permit me to do it; and, if the
latter, that I should be thankful for his kindness. At this moment he
entered, when the boy, who had just spoken to me, approached him, and
said, pointing to me, "That there chap says as how he wants to sell
them things of his in your box, and that I am to go with him, to show
him the place where I sold my things." To this falsehood I could not
submit, and I therefore went up to the drum-major, and said, "Sir, I
said nothing of the kind; all I said was, that I supposed you would
either dispose of the things for my benefit, or allow me to do
so."--"Yes, yes," said the drum-major, "that's all right; I will sell
them for you, and you shall have the money." The boy here turned upon
his heel, muttering something like _fudge!_ and the things were put into
a handkerchief and carried off into the town. When the drum-major had
left us, the same boy came up to me, and called me a liar, stating that
he had a great mind to thresh me; and, as a proof of his inclination, he
attempted to seize my nose between his finger and thumb. I got in a
rage, and told him, if he ventured to touch me, I would fell him to the
ground; when all the boys gathered round us, and said, "Well done,
Johnny Raw!"--"Well done, old leather-breeches!"--"That's right, Johnny
Wapstraw!" Finding that I did not venture to strike the first blow, my
antagonist called me a coward. This I knew I was not; so, as I could
submit to his insolence no longer, I struck him, and to it we went in
right earnest. After half a dozen rounds my opponent gave in. This, my
first victory, established that I was neither a coward nor to be hoaxed
with impunity. Eulogiums were showered down upon me, and the shouting
and uproar were beyond description. I understood afterwards that he was
a great bully, and always fighting. Our boxing-match had just concluded,
when the drum-major entered, and produced the proceeds of my clothes;
viz., £1 1s. 6d. for a new hat, coat, waistcoat, and leathers: a fair
price, some said; while others thought they ought to have fetched thirty
shillings; but I was very well satisfied, and stood hot rolls and butter
to all around, not forgetting my antagonist, who shook hands, and said
it was the first time he had ever been beaten, and that he would some
day, in friendship, have another trial. I assured him that I should be
at any time at his service, and thus this matter ended.

After this I went into town, to purchase a few requisites, such as a
powder-bag, puff, soap, candles, grease, &c.; and, having procured what
I stood in need of, I returned to my barrack, where I underwent the
operation of having my hair tied for the first time, to the no small
amusement of all the boys assembled. A large piece of candle-grease was
applied, first to the sides of my head, then to the hind long hair;
after this, the same kind of operation was performed with nasty stinking
soap--sometimes the man who was dressing me applying his knuckles,
instead of the soap, to the delight of the surrounding boys, who were
bursting their sides with laughter, to see the tears roll down my
cheeks. When this operation was over, I had to go through one of a more
serious nature. A large pad, or bag filled with sand, was poked into the
back of my head, round which the hair was gathered tight, and the whole
tied round with a leather thong. When I was dressed for parade, I could
scarcely get my eyelids to perform their office; the skin of my eyes and
face was drawn so tight by the plug that was stuck in the back of my
head, that I could not possibly shut my eyes; add to this, an enormous
high stock was poked under my chin; so that, altogether, I felt as stiff
as if I had swallowed a ramrod, or a sergeant's halberd. Shortly after I
was thus equipped, dinner was served; but my poor jaws refused to act on
the offensive, and when I made an attempt to eat, my pad behind went up
and down like a sledge-hammer.

In the evening I went to parade, and was inspected by the colonel, who
said I was a promising lad, but that my clothes did not fit, which he
ordered to be altered. At this moment the master of the band came up to
the colonel, and said that he should like to have me in the band, to
learn the flute and to beat the triangles. This request was granted, and
I was the following day removed to the band-room, and commenced my
musical avocations; and in six months I had beaten the sides of the
triangles nearly as thin as my own, and had also become a tolerable
flute-player: but, as at that time we got several volunteers from the
militia, among whom were two excellent flute-players, I was removed back
to the drummer's room, and put to the fife. In a short time I was made
fife-major--no small office, I assure you. I wore two stripes and a
tremendous long sash, which almost touched the ground. As the reader may
suppose, I was not a little proud of my new office; I began to ride the
high horse among my old comrades, and to show my authority by enforcing
obedience by very powerful arguments; for I was permitted to carry a
small cane, and to use it too. In the absence of the drum-major, which
was frequent, I carried the silver-headed stick, some seven feet long,
and when we furnished the band for general guard-mounting, I astonished
the spectators with my double demi-semi twist of my cane, and began to
think myself one of the brightest of the bright. At this period the
regiment moved to the Hythe, about a mile from Colchester, and twice a
day we beat through the streets, followed by all the girls and boys in
the town, some of the rosy-cheeked beauties begging me to play favourite
tunes of theirs. These entreaties for particular airs were urged with
such pathos, accompanied with such fascinating smiles and leers, that
the fife-major occasionally vouchsafed to comply, always, however,
keeping up his dignity, by making a compliance with such requests appear
a great condescension. I strutted about the town with my little cane
under my arm, like some great man of eminent consequence, whom the
community could not do without; became a great favourite with all my
officers; was happy and contented; and time passed imperceptibly and
very pleasantly away. Meantime, I grew very tall, though somewhat
slender; and my red coat had been thrown off, for which was substituted
a splendid white silver-laced jacket, with two small silver epaulettes,
which my swagger induced to fan the evening breeze.

My days were now comparatively cloudless; yet still my youthful tricks
had not entirely left me. Some of these frequently led me into scrapes
and unpleasant predicaments. The following were among the frolics with
which I at this time diverted myself: viz., filling the pipes of my
comrades with gunpowder; putting a lighted candle in their hands while
asleep, then tickling their noses with a straw; tying their great toes
together, then crying out fire; blacking their hands with soot, then
tickling their ears and noses, to induce them to scratch themselves, and
thus to black their faces all over; putting lighted paper between their
toes when asleep; pulling the stools from behind them when in the act of
sitting down; sewing their shirts to their bedding when asleep: all
these, with fifty more, I regret to say, were in those days my constant
delight and practice. These mischievous pranks led me into many a fight,
but that did not discourage me. I had a natural propensity to tease
people; and, as I did not scruple to indulge it, you may be sure I did
not escape without my share of tricks in return. He who plays at fives,
says the old proverb, must expect rubbers; and accordingly, one day,
when I was sitting upstairs, a hundred voices bawled out, "Pass the word
for the fife-major; the adjutant wants him." I bounced down in an
instant, and soon found that the whole barrack were in a roar of
laughter at my expense; for, to the tail of my coat was attached a large
sheet of paper with these words in legible characters, "The Biter Bit."
To have evinced any displeasure at this hoax, would only have served to
render me more ridiculous, and to increase the hooting and laughter at
my expense; so I joined in the laugh, and affected to think it a
remarkably good joke.

About this period a circumstance happened which, in some degree,
blighted my pride, and almost cooled my military zeal. It was nutting
season: I made a party to go, and we arrived at the wood, where the
filberts hung as thick as laurels on a soldier's brow. We had not bagged
more than a bushel, when we were pounced upon by three keepers, and
taken prisoners to the barracks. The three boys who were my companions
on this excursion got two dozen stripes; I lost my two as fife-major,
and was turned back to my original post as drummer, or rather as fifer.
This severe punishment did not arise from the enormity of purloining the
nuts, but from the fact of our being found some four miles from the
cantonment. Under these circumstances we might have been taken up as
deserters, and the keepers have received two pounds each man; so that,
upon the whole, we had reason to be grateful that the more serious
offence was not urged against us.

Shortly after this unfortunate occurrence, the regiment was ordered to
proceed to the barracks at Hilsea, Portsmouth. This was soldiering in
clover; and good living, fresh scenes, faces, and events, conspired to
make me, in a measure, forget the stripes which I had lost. I was not
long on the march, before I became as knowing as the best of them, and
was soon well versed in the tricks of the road. I found that it was the
practice of some of the landlords to give us fat pea-soup, and of others
to regale us with greasy suet dumplings, as heavy as lead, by way of
taking off the edge of our appetites. These dishes I invariably avoided,
stating that they were injurious to my constitution, or that the doctors
had forbidden me to eat such food. I therefore waited for the more
substantial fare--the roast and the boiled--which I attacked with such
zest, as could not fail to convince the landlord of the delicacy of my
constitution, and of the absolute necessity of my refraining from less
substantial diet. In two hours after dinner the duff and pea-soup eaters
were as hungry as ever; but I kept my own counsel, and thus was enabled
to go on my way with a smiling countenance that indicated good and
substantial fare.

When we were treated in the scurvy way I have spoken of by the landlords
on our line of march, we never failed to leave some token of our
displeasure behind us. Thus, one day at Chelmsford, we were compelled to
submit to dreadful bad quarters; and even the extreme delicacy of my
constitution, which had so often succeeded with me before, could not, on
this occasion, induce our host to give us anything but greasy puddings
and fat stews, made of the offal of his house for the last month. The
fat on the top of this heterogeneous mixture was an inch thick; and I,
for my own part, protested that I could not and would not eat it.
Finding me so positive, he privately slipped a shilling into my hand to
quiet me, which I did not think it expedient to refuse. This bribe
tended, in some degree, to pacify me; but my comrades, on quitting the
house, evinced their disapprobation of the treatment they had met with,
by writing with a lighted candle on the ceiling, "D----d bad
quarters--How are you off for pea-soup?--Lead dumplings--Lousy
beds--Dirty sheets."

This was the mildest description of punishment with which we visited
landlords who incurred our displeasure; for, in addition to this, it did
not require any very aggravated treatment to induce us to teach some of
mine host's ducks and geese to march part of the way on the road with
us; to wit, until we could get them dressed.

These birds would sometimes find their way into drums. I was once myself
a party concerned in a pilfering of this kind--at least, indirectly so;
for I was accessory to the act of stealing a fine goose--a witness of
its death, or rather, what we supposed its death--and an assistant in
_drumming_ it. Moreover, I do not doubt that I should have willingly
lent a hand towards eating it also. The goose, however, was, in our
opinion at least, very snugly secured, and we commenced our march
without the least fear of detection, chuckling in our sleeves how
completely we had eluded the landlord's vigilance. The bird only wanted
dressing to complete the joke, and discussion was running high among us
as to how that could be accomplished, when, to our astonishment, who
should pass us on horseback but the landlord himself! He rode very
coolly by, and, as he took no sort of notice of us, we concluded that he
might very probably have other business on the road, and for a time we
thought nothing more of the matter; but what were our feelings when, on
halting in the market-place, we perceived this very landlord in earnest
conversation with our colonel; and, to all appearance, "laying down the
law," as it is called, in a most strenuous manner. At last, the colonel
and he moved towards us; on perceiving which my knees broke into
double-quick time, and my heart into a full gallop. On arriving near to
the spot where our guilty party was drawn up, the colonel, addressing
us, stated that, "the gentleman who stood by his side, complained that
he had lost one of his geese, and had informed him he had good reason to
suspect that some of the party to whom he now spoke had stolen it." For
the satisfaction of "the gentleman," whom we, one and all, most heartily
wished under ground, our knapsacks were ordered to be examined, and
underwent the most scrupulous inspection; but no goose was to be found.
Professing his regret for the trouble he had caused, and apparently
satisfied that his suspicions were ill-founded, our worthy landlord was
just on the point of leaving us, and the boys around were grinning with
delight at the notion of having so effectually deceived him, when, to
our utter confusion and dismay, the goose, at this very juncture, gave a
deep groan, and the landlord protested roundly that "that there sound
was from his goose." Upon this, the investigation was renewed with
redoubled ardour; our great coats were turned inside out, and, in short,
almost everything belonging to us was examined with the minutest
attention; but still no goose was to be found. The officers could not
refrain from smiling, and the boys began again to grin at the fun; but
this merriment was doomed to be but of short duration, for the poor
goose, now in its last moments, uttered another groan, more loud and
mournful than the former one. In fact, the vital spark had just taken
its flight; and this might be construed into the last dying speech of
the ill-fated bird, and a full confession of its dreadful situation and
murder. The drum, in which the now defunct goose was confined, stood
close against the landlord's elbow, and his ear was, unfortunately for
us, so correct in ascertaining whence the sound of woe proceeded, that
he at once roared out, "Dang my buttons, if my goose bean't in that
there drum!" These words were daggers to our souls; we made sure of as
many stripes on our backs as there were feathers on the goose's; and our
merriment was suddenly changed into mortification and despair. The
drum-head was ordered to be taken off, and sure enough there lay poor
goosey, as dead as a herring. The moment the landlord perceived it, he
protested that "as he was a sinner, that was his goose." This assertion
there was no one among us hardy enough to deny; and the colonel desired
that the goose should be given up to the publican, assuring him, at the
same time, that he should cause the offenders to be severely punished
for the theft which had been committed. Fortunately for our poor backs,
we now found a truly humane and kind-hearted man in the landlord whom we
had offended; for, no sooner did he find that affairs were taking a more
serious turn than he had contemplated, and that it was likely that he
should be the cause of getting a child flogged, than he affected to
doubt the identity of the goose; and, at length, utterly disclaimed it,
saying to the colonel, "This is none of mine, Sir; I see it has a black
spot on the back, whereas mine was pure white; besides, it has a black
head: I wish you a good morning, Sir, and am very sorry for the trouble
I have given you." Thus saying, he left us, muttering, as he went along,
"Get a child flogged for a tarnation old goose? no, no!" Every step he
took carried a ton weight off our hearts. Notwithstanding this generous
conduct in the publican, who was also, by his own acknowledgment a
sinner, our colonel saw very clearly how matters stood; but, in
consideration of our youth, and that this was our first offence--at
least that had been discovered--he contented himself with severely
admonishing us; and the business ended, shortly after, with the
demolition of the goose--roasted.

We remained at Hilsea Barracks for nearly a year, where we acquired the
appellation of the "Red Knights," from our clothing being all of that
colour. I do not recollect anything of importance that occurred to me at
that place, except that I was condemned to pass a week in the black-hole
there, for what the soldiers called "eating my shoes." This punishment I
brought upon myself in the following manner. I had been out to receive
my half-mounting, consisting of a pair of shoes, a shirt, two pair of
stockings, and a stock; and, on my way home, as ill-luck would have it,
an old woman, with whom I had frequently before had dealings, and who
was well known, among us by the title of the plum-pudding woman,
happened to throw herself in my way. Her pudding was smoking hot, I was
exceedingly hungry, and my mouth watered so at the tempting sight, that
I could not drag myself away. But, much as I longed for a slice, what
was to be done? I had no money, and my friend the plum-pudding woman was
by far too old a soldier to give trust till pay-day.[4] The pudding,
however, it was impossible for me to dispense with; and finding,
therefore, that all my promises and entreaties, with the view of
obtaining credit, were fruitless, I at length, in an evil hour, incited
by the savoury smell which issued from the old woman's basket, proposed
to her to buy my shoes. After a good deal of bargaining, we at length
came to an understanding, by which it was agreed, that in consideration
of a quarter of a yard of pudding, and a shilling to be to me paid and
delivered, my new shoes were to be handed over to the dealer in
plum-pudding, as her own proper goods and chattels.

This contract being honourably completed on both sides, I retreated to a
solitary shed to eat my _duff_ (the name by which this description of
pudding was well known among us), where without any great exertion, I
soon brought the two extremities of my quarter of a yard together. The
last mouthful put me to the extremity of my wits to devise how I could
possibly account for the sudden disappearance of my shoes. My first
impulse was to run in search of the old woman, and endeavour, by fair
promises, to coax her out of the shoes again; but I soon found that no
such chance was left me, for she had made a precipitate retreat from the
place where we had transacted our business together, knowing well that
she was punishable for having bought such articles of me. Nothing
appeared to be now left for me but a palpable falsehood; and, although
of this I had a great abhorrence, yet I really had not sufficient
courage to think of avowing the literal truth. At length I thought I had
hit upon a sort of compromise, and I determined to say that I had
dropped my shoes on my way home; which, though not exactly the fact, yet
approached nearer to the truth than anything else I could devise, likely
to serve my end. As on all other occasions of the kind, however, it
appeared that I might just as well have made a full confession at
once--for my statement was not believed--and as I could not in any other
way account satisfactorily for the elopement of my shoes, I was ordered
seven days' black-hole for the purpose of refreshing my memory. Against
this punishment I prayed long and loudly, but all to no purpose; so,
with the remainder of my day's rations under my arm, off I was marched,
not much elated with the dreary prospect before me. When I heard the
door of the cell creak upon its hinges behind me, and the huge key grate
in the lock, I began to think that I had parted with my shoes too cheap,
and, for some time after, I sat myself down in a corner, and brooded in
melancholy mood over the misfortune which I had by my own folly brought
upon myself. But I was never one of the desponding kind; and it
therefore soon occurred to me, that, instead of indulging in dismal
reflections, it would be far wiser, and more pleasant, to devise some
means by which I might contrive to amuse myself during the period of my
confinement. Seven days and seven nights appeared to me at first to be a
long time to remain encaged in darkness; and yet there was certainly
something soldier-like in the situation. The mere fact of being a
prisoner had a military sound with it. To be sure, I was imprisoned for
having eaten my shoes; but what of that? Was it not quite as easy for
me to imagine myself a prisoner of war? Certainly it was; and
accordingly, with this impression strong on my mind, I dropped into a
profound sleep in the midst of my meditations, and dreamed that I was
deposited in this dungeon by the chance of war. On waking I found myself
extremely cold, from which I inferred that it would be necessary for me
to contrive some plan by which I might comfort my body as well as my
mind; and I therefore immediately set about standing on my head, walking
on my hands, tumbling head over heels, and similar gymnastic exercises.
In this manner, sleeping and playing by turns, I managed to pass my time
in the black-hole for one whole day and night, by no means unpleasantly;
when, about nine o'clock the next morning, I heard the well-known voice
of the drum-major asking for me, and desiring that I might be liberated.
On hearing this order given, I presumed that, of course, my period of
captivity had expired: and, although the time certainly appeared to have
passed off at a wonderfully rapid rate, yet I accounted for it by
considering that I had slept away the greater part of it; and, in
addition to this, that it was but natural it should seem to have passed
quickly, since I had been, during the whole period, exempt from parades,
drills, head-soaping, &c. When I first got into the daylight, I could
scarcely open my eyes; and, no sooner had I brought my optics into a
state to endure the light, than I was asked by the drum-major how I
liked my new abode, and if I was ready to return to it. I perceived,
from the smile which accompanied these questions, that I had little
further to fear, and I soon understood that I had only spent one day and
one night in the black-hole, and that the remainder of my sentence had
been remitted. I was hailed by all my comrades, as if I had been cast
on, and escaped from, some desolate island; and, having macadamized my
inward man with six penny pies, out of the shilling I had received from
the old pudding-woman--of which I was still possessed--I was soon as fit
for fun again as the best of them.

But, the regiment being now about to embark for Guernsey, I will
commence our voyage in a new chapter.

[Illustration]

[Illustration]

FOOTNOTES:

[3] The object of government in forming these "experimental regiments,"
as they were called, was to relieve parishes of boys, from the age of
ten to sixteen, who were allowed to enlist, on the parish paying the
expenses of their journey to some recruiting depôt. Each of these
regiments was composed of a thousand boys, who made such excellent
soldiers, that it appears extraordinary no such plan was ever again
adopted; the three regiments here spoken of having been the only corps
formed in this way.

[Some additional particulars, obtained from the War Office records, will
be found in the introduction to this edition.--ED.]

[4] Soldiers were then paid once in each month.--ED.




CHAPTER III.


We had received orders to hold ourselves in readiness to embark--as I
then imagined, for foreign parts; and the idea made my heart bound for
joy. In a few days we embarked on board a small sloop, at about four
o'clock in the afternoon, and in an hour after got under weigh. When the
sun had retired to his western chamber, the sky looked gloomy, and
indicated wind; and, in another hour, there arose so terrific a gale,
that we were obliged to put the tarpaulins over the hatches, to protect
us against the large seas which broke over us. The scene was enough to
frighten a person of greater courage than I possessed. There were
soldiers crying--women screaming--children squalling--sailors
swearing--the storm all the while continuing to increase, until at
length it blew a perfect hurricane; the rain came down in torrents, and
the vivid lightning's flash exhibited the fear depicted on every
countenance. At this juncture a poor frightened soldier mustered up
courage enough to ask the captain or master of the sloop, if there was
any danger. At this question every ear was open, and the son of Neptune
gruffly replied, "Danger, shipmate! If the storm continues another hour,
I would not give a rope-yarn for all your lives. When we reach that
point on the larboard-bow, you must throw out your grappling-irons, and
hold in, for she will be then close-hauled and go under water like a
duck, and you will all be in David's locker before you can say, Luff,
boy!" Then, addressing himself to one of his men, "Steady, Tom, steady;
don't let her go off; don't you see the light ahead? run it down.
Steady, boy, steady! luff a little, luff!" At this moment an awful sea
broke over us. My mouth was full, and I was wet to the skin; but,
strange to say, I felt no alarm. Our little vessel dived like the gull
after its prey. As soon as she righted, I said, "Captain, that was a
wetter." He replied, "Ay, boy; you will get plenty of them before we
make the port."--"Very consoling, truly," thought I to myself. I had
just squeezed myself up into a small compass, head and knees together,
close to the helm, when we shipped another tremendous sea, which carried
away our foresail, and made so terrific and dreadful a flapping, that an
officer bellowed out from below, "Is there anything the matter?"--"Yes,"
replied the captain, "the devil to pay, and no pitch hot." These words
were scarcely spoken, when we shipped another awful sea, which washed
three soldiers overboard. At this crisis, a sailor bellowed out, "Light
ahead, sir."--"The devil there is! what does it look like?" roared the
captain.--"Like a light," replied the sailor.--"A Frenchman, I suppose,"
vociferated the captain. These words caught the ear of the military
captain on board, who holloed out from below, "What did you say about a
Frenchman?"--"Why, that if it gets clear, we may have a bit of a fight;
for I see there is a Frenchman ahead," replied the sea captain.--"Then,"
said the soldier, "I had better get my men ready. Sergeant, get the
bugler! Sound to arms! Call the drummer, and tell him to beat to arms!"
But the devil a drummer, drum, bugler, or bugle was forthcoming. All the
men were busily engaged below, and by no means in a condition to come to
the scratch, French or no French. Notwithstanding this, the noble
soldier strutted about on deck by himself, with a cocked hat, and sword
in hand, when a merciless sea washed off his gay hat, and the gallant
captain lost his balance, and fell into the hold, bawling out most
lustily for his three-cornered scraper, which was buffeting the raging
billows. "I say, captain, have the goodness to send down my hat. Is my
hat upon deck? Have you seen my hat?" "Your hat, sir," replied the son
of Neptune, with infinite _sang-froid_, "has got under sail, and I
should not be surprised if it made port before you." Here he changed the
subject, by hailing the man on the forecastle. "Tom, where is the
strange sail?"--"Sheered off to leeward; but she is a Frenchman, by the
cut of her gib," replied the sailor. "Steady," said our naval commander,
and on we went; but by no means steadily, for I never saw a little bark
more unsteady, though she really seemed to dive through the water like a
duck. Morning now began to dawn, which only threw light (as even the
captain confessed) upon the heaviest sea he had ever seen. The black
clouds seemed to fly, and the thunder and lightning to rend the very
atmosphere asunder. Our distant haven was in sight; but the wind was
foul, and it was therefore impossible to avoid making several tacks
before we could get in. Our poor fellows, what from fear, cold, hunger,
want of sleep, and being wet through, were completely worn out. I kept
my station the whole night, more from fear than from any attachment to
it; although I certainly did not feel the great alarm that was so
visibly depicted on the countenances of most of my comrades. From
extreme cold, and being quite wet through, I cut but a sorry figure by
the time we began to near the land. The prospect, from about three or
four miles off, was extremely beautiful. Some little cottages studded
the high and lofty rocks, and, here and there, small bays and little
villages enlivened the scene, and consoled us with the idea that we were
not going to be landed on a barren rock. We soon after saw the extensive
town of Guernsey. Part of it seemed hanging on an eminence, and the view
of the old castle, which is built of stone, and calculated to buffet
with many a wintry storm, was extremely picturesque. In the distance we
could see Fort George; and, in ten minutes after, we ran into the bay,
which, being sheltered and protected by surrounding high lands, was
tranquil indeed, when compared with the main ocean. Boats were in
attendance, and we soon set our wet limbs on _terra firma_. Having
landed, I could not help viewing my person, of which I at all times had
a good opinion. I looked, for all the world, like a squeezed lemon, or
the bag of a Scotch pipe; and I should have been glad to have taken the
edge off my appetite, and the dirt off my clothes, instead of dancing
through the town; but I was, of course, obliged to obey orders, and when
I struck up my tune--for I still led the fifers--I tipped Monsieur "The
Downfall of Paris." I found the march did me a great deal of good; and,
by the time I reached the barracks, I was in prime order for my
breakfast.

We were stationed in Fort George, in exceedingly good quarters, though I
could not bring myself to be reconciled to the ponderous drawbridges in
use there, which foreboded no great stretch of liberty. I was
particularly fond of rural and pensive wanderings, to muse on nature's
beauties; and the sight of an orchard, in particular, was at all times
hailed by me with great delight, for I could feast upon its beauties for
hours together, to the gratification of more faculties than my vision.
The drawbridges seemed to cut off these delightful prospects. It was
true, I could see them from the fort; but then the prospect was too far,
and I lost all relish in the distance; and, being in consequence
compelled to steal out, I was apprehensive that some of my solitary
rambles would get me into disgrace. My doubts and forebodings on this
head were soon verified; for, in less than a week, I saw my name posted
up at the gate--"John Shipp, confined to his barracks for one week." A
week was to me an age. Confinement was to me intolerable; deprived of
the pure air, of the delightful ramble along an orchard's edge, and of
the salubrious smell of the orange groves. Oft have I, from the
rampart-top, sighed at the distant prospect, and, while my longing eye
lingered on the golden produce of the orchard within sight, my heart
panted to be at liberty, to take a nearer view, and taste again of
nature's beauties. The word _confinement_ haunted me from one bastion to
another, and I saw no refuge for the future but a more circumspect line
of conduct, on which I firmly resolved. When three long days of my week
had been numbered with the dead, the drum-major was taken seriously ill,
and on the morning parade the colonel inspected the drummers. I was
always remarkably clean--that was my pride: the colonel eyed me from
head to foot, and at last told the adjutant that I was to act as
drum-major. I was nearly shouting "Liberty" in the colonel's face, but I
checked myself just in time. He at the same time gave me a ticket for a
play, which was to be acted in the town; and, in the evening, several
boys were committed to my care, to accompany me to the theatre. Thus,
for a brief interval, I was restored to favour; but, whenever fickle
fortune deigned to smile upon me, some untoward circumstance was sure to
happen, and nip the fair promise in its bud. I had scarcely got the
stick of office into my hands, before I cut so many capers with it, that
I soon capered myself back to the dignity and full rank of fifer, was
deprived of my staff of office, and, of what I considered even much
worse, my liberty. My name was again exhibited to public gaze at the
drawbridge-gate, for seven long days, during which I was obliged to kick
my heels along the ramparts, contenting myself with contemplating the
distant prospect. One day I effaced my name from the list of the
confined, unobserved by the sentinel; but in this I was detected by the
sergeant, for which I had the felicity of attending drill three times
a-day with my musket reversed and my coat turned inside out;[5] and, in
this manner, for several hours each day I was obliged to comply with the
mandates of a little bandy-legged drill-sergeant, who did not fail to
enforce his authority and dignity in a manner by no means agreeable to
my feelings, especially to those of my back. This I could bear well
enough: indeed, I was obliged to bear it; but my turned coat seemed to
hang upon me like some badge of ignominy, and I imagined that every eye
was upon me. Had I been a depraved and callous-hearted youth, this
method of disgracing me would have only served to harden me in vice; and
I cannot deny, that at this treatment I felt the seeds of disobedience
rankling in my heart, and had almost resolved within my mind, that the
next time I was doomed to wear this garb of infamy, it should be for a
crime worthy of such disgrace. I found my disposition soured, and the
spark of revenge kindling in my bosom; and I am persuaded that this
method of disgracing youth, instead of eradicating vice, serves only to
nurture those rancorous feelings which irritation, arising from a sense
of degradation, is sure to excite, and which, in the young mind, might,
by a more judicious and conciliatory treatment, be either totally
repressed in their birth, or at least easily extinguished.

Our regiment being now ordered to prepare for embarkation for
Portsmouth, my garb of disgrace was thrown off, and I embarked as
sprightly as any, having been disgraced in this way for a misdemeanour
that would scarcely have disgraced a schoolboy. We reached our old
barracks at Portsmouth, without any other occurrence save a little
casting-up of accounts, and a few distorted faces from sea-sickness.

[Illustration]

[Illustration]

FOOTNOTES:

[5] Wearing the coat turned inside out (whence "turncoat"), an old
military punishment now long since forgotten. It survived as a
punishment for drunkenness among Chelsea and Greenwich in-pensioners for
years after it had been discontinued in the service.--ED.




CHAPTER IV.


We had not been long at Portsmouth, when the head-quarters of the
regiment were ordered to embark on board of the _Surat Castle_ East
Indiaman, a fifteen-hundred-ton ship, then lying off Spithead, and the
remainder of the corps on board of other ships at the same place. Our
destination was the Cape of Good Hope. The _Surat Castle_ in which I was
doomed to sail, was most dreadfully crowded; men literally slept upon
one another, and in the orlop-deck the standing beds were three tiers
high, besides those slinging. Added to this, the seeds of a pestilential
disease had already been sown. An immense number of Lascars, who had
been picked up in every sink of poverty, and most of whom had been
living in England in a state of the most abject want and wretchedness,
had been shipped on board this vessel. Many of these poor creatures had
been deprived of their toes and fingers by the inclemency of winter, and
others had accumulated diseases from filth, many of them having
subsisted for a considerable time upon what they picked up in the
streets. The pestilential smell between decks was beyond the power of
description; and it was truly appalling to see these poor wretches, with
tremendous and frightful sores, and covered with vermin from head to
foot, many of them unable to assist themselves, left to die unaided,
unfriended, and without one who could perform the last sad office. The
moment the breath was out of their bodies, they were, like dogs, thrown
overboard as food for sharks. To alleviate their sufferings by personal
aid was impossible, for we had scarcely men enough to work the ship.
These circumstances were, I suppose, reported to the proper authority;
but, whether this was the case or not, in three or four days we weighed
anchor, with about sixty other ships for all parts of the world. The
splendid sight but little accorded with the aching hearts, lacerated
bodies, and wounded minds of the poor creatures below. It was about four
o'clock in the afternoon when the signal was fired to weigh. Immediately
every sail was waving in the wind, and in a quarter of an hour after we
stood out from land, each proud bark dipping her majestic head in the
silvery deep, and manoeuvring her sails in seeming competition, to catch
the favouring breeze.

Such firing, such signals, such tacking and running across each other
now prevailed, that our captain resolved to run from it; and the evening
had scarcely spread her sombre curtains over the western ocean, and the
golden clouds begun to change their brilliant robes of day for those of
murky night, when our crew "up helm," and stole away from the motley
fleet, plying every sail, and scudding through the blue waters like some
aerial car or phantom-ship, smoothly gliding over the silvery deep. In
three or four hours we had entirely lost sight of our convoy. We were
running at the rate of eleven knots an hour, and, as it seemed, into the
very jaws of danger. The clouds began to assume a pitchy and awful
darkness, the distant thunder rolled angrily, and the vivid lightning's
flash struck each watching eye dim, and, for a moment, hid the rolling
and gigantic wave from the sight of fear. The wind whistled
terrifically, and the shattered sails fanned the flying clouds. All was
consternation; every eye betrayed fear. Sail was taken in, masts lowered
and yards stayed--preparations which bespoke no good tidings to the
inquiring and terrified landsman. I was seated on the poop, alone,
holding by a hen-coop, and viewing the mountainous and angry billows,
with my hand partly covering my eyes, to protect them against the
lightning. It was a moment of the most poignant sorrow to me: my heart
still lingered on the white cliffs of Albion; nor could I wean it from
the sorrowful reflection that I was, perhaps, leaving that dear and
beloved country for ever. During this struggle of my feelings, our
vessel shipped a tremendous sea over her poop, and then angrily shook
her head, and seemed resolved to buffet the raging elements with all her
might and main. The ship was shortly after this "hove to," and lay
comparatively quiet; and, in about a couple of hours, the wind
slackened, and we again stood on our way, the masts cracking under her
three topsails, and fore storm-staysail. However, she rode much easier,
and the storm still continued to abate. I was dreadfully wet and cold,
and my teeth chattered most woefully; so I made towards the gun-deck,
some portion of which was allotted for the soldiers. There the heat was
suffocating, and the stench intolerable. The scene in the orlop-deck was
truly distressing: soldiers, their wives and children, all lying
together in a state of the most dreadful sea-sickness, groaning in
concert, and calling for a drop of water to cool their parched tongues.
I screwed myself up behind a butt, and soon fell into that stupor which
sea-sickness will create. In this state I continued until morning; and,
when I awoke, I found that the hurricane had returned with redoubled
fury, and that we were standing towards land. The captain came ahead to
look out, and, after some consideration, he at last told the officer to
stand out to sea. The following morning was ushered in by the sun's
bright beams diffusing their lustre on the dejected features of
frightened and helpless mortals. The dark clouds of sad despair were in
mercy driven from our minds, and the bright beams of munificent love
from above took their place. The before downcast eye was seen to sparkle
with delight, and the haggard cheek of despondency resumed its wonted
serenity. The tempestuous bosom of the main was now smooth as a mirror,
and all seemed grateful and cheerful, directing the eye of hope towards
the far-distant haven to which we were bound.

A great number of the fleet were the same morning to be seen emerging
from their shelter, or hiding-place, from the terrific hurricane of the
day before; but our captain was resolved to be alone; so the same night
he crowded sail, and, by the following morning's dawn, we were so much
ahead that not a sail was visible, save one solitary sloop, that seemed
bending her way towards England.

Some three weeks after this we were again visited by a most dreadful
storm, that far exceeded the former one, and from which we suffered much
external injury, our main top-mast, and other smaller masts, being
carried away. But the interior of our poor bark exhibited a scene of far
greater desolation. We were then far from land, and a pestilential
disease was raging among us in all its terrific forms. Nought could be
seen but the pallid cheek of disease, or the sunken eye of despair. The
sea-gulls soared over the ship, and huge sharks hovered around it,
watching for their prey. These creatures are sure indications of ships
having some pestilential disease on board, and they have been known to
follow a vessel so circumstanced to the most distant climes--to
countries far from their native element. To add to our distresses, some
ten barrels of ship's paint, or colour, got loose from their lashings,
and rolled from side to side, and from head to stern, carrying
everything before them by their enormous weight. From our inability to
stop them in their destructive progress, they one and all were staved
in, and the gun-deck soon became one mass of colours, in which lay the
dead and the dying, both white and black.

It would be difficult for the reader to picture to himself a set of men
more deplorably situated that we now were; but our distresses were not
yet at their height: for, as though our miseries still required
aggravation, the scurvy broke out among us in a most frightful manner.
Scarcely a single individual on board escaped this melancholy disorder,
and the swollen legs, and gums protruding beyond the lips, attested the
malignancy of the visitation. The dying were burying the dead, and the
features of all on board wore the garb of mourning.

Every assistance and attention that humanity or generosity could
dictate, was freely and liberally bestowed by the officers on board, who
cheerfully gave up their fresh meat and many other comforts, for the
benefit of the distressed; but the pestilence baffled the aid of
medicine and the skill of the medical attendants. My poor legs were as
big as drums; my gums swollen to an enormous size; my tongue too big for
my mouth; and all I could eat was raw potatoes and vinegar. But my kind
and affectionate officers sometimes brought me some tea and coffee, at
which the languid eye would brighten, and the tear of gratitude would
intuitively fall, in spite of my efforts to repress what was thought
unmanly. Our spirits were so subdued by suffering, and our frames so
much reduced and emaciated, that I have seen poor men weep bitterly,
they knew not why. Thus passed the time; men dying in dozens, and, ere
their blood was cold, hurled into the briny deep, there to become a prey
to sharks. It was a dreadful sight to see the bodies of our comrades the
bone of disputation with these voracious natives of the dreary deep; and
the reflection that such might soon be our own fate would crush our best
feelings, and with horror drive the eye from such a sight. Our
muster-rolls were dreadfully thinned: indeed, almost every fourth man
amongst the Europeans, and more than two-thirds of the natives, had
fallen victims to the diseases on board; and it was by the mercy of
Providence only, that the ship ever reached its destination, for we had
scarcely a seaman fit for duty to work her. Never shall I forget the
morning I saw the land. In the moment of joy I forgot all my miseries,
and cast them into the deep, in the hope of future happiness. This is
mortal man's career. Past scenes are drowned and forgotten, in the
anticipation of happier events to come; and, by a cherished delusion,
we allow ourselves to be transported into the fairy land of imagination,
in quest of future joys--never, perhaps, to be realized, but the
contemplation of which, in the distance, serves at least to soothe us
under present suffering.

When the view of land first blessed our sight, the morning was foggy and
dreary. We were close under the land, and were in the very act of
standing from it, when the fog dispersed, the wind shifted fair, and we
ran in close to the mouth of Simon's Bay. The now agreeable breeze
ravished our sickened souls, and the surrounding view delighted our dim
and desponding eyes. Every one who could crawl was upon deck, to welcome
the sight of land, and inhale the salubrious air. Every soul on board
seemed elated with joy; and, when the anchor was let go, it was indeed
an anchor to the broken hearts of poor creatures then stretched on the
bed of sickness, who had not, during the whole voyage, seen the bright
sun rising and setting--sights at sea that beggar the power of
description. For myself, I jumped and danced about like a merry-andrew,
and I found, or fancied I found, myself already a convalescent.

The anchor had not been down long, when a boat came off from shore, on
board of which were several medical gentlemen, who questioned us as to
whence we came, whither we were bound, the state of the ship, the nature
of the disease, and the number of men that had died during the passage.
The number of men was a finishing blow to our present hopes, and we were
ordered to ride at quarantine; but every comfort that humanity or
liberality could dictate was immediately sent on board: fresh meats,
bread, tea, sugar, coffee, and fruits of all kinds; and, in a few days,
our legs began to re-assume their original shapes, and the disease died
away. The quarantine was very soon taken off, and the troops landed, and
were marched, or rather carried, to the barracks that stand on the brow
of the hill, at the back of Simon's Town. Here our treatment was that of
children of distress; every comfort was afforded us, and every means
adopted by our kind officers, which could contribute towards our
recovery. For the first fortnight drills were out of the question,
instead of which we were kindly nursed, until the disease was completely
eradicated; and by this careful treatment we were all soon restored to
the enjoyment of health. But few men died of those that were landed;
and, if I recollect right, our total loss was seventy-two men.
Notwithstanding all our troubles and misfortunes, we arrived before the
other divisions of the regiment; but they had not suffered from disease:
their loss was two men only.[6]

[Illustration]

[Illustration]

FOOTNOTES:

[6] According to Barrow, the ships bringing the other "experimental"
boy-regiments to the Cape, suffered in like manner from "ship-fever."
It affords a suggestive commentary on the transport-service of that time
that the same ships, after they had been properly disinfected at the
Cape, carried troops to Egypt without sickness.--ED.




CHAPTER V.


Simon's Town is situated on the bay which bears the same name, and
contains many well-built houses. Here we were stationed for a short
time; and, as the regiment was not restricted from going out, I soon
commenced reconnoitring the localities of the neighbourhood, and was
glad to find that there were a number of well-stocked gardens close to
the barracks. A pound of meat (and that of the worst) and three-quarters
of a pound of bread per diem, was but a scanty allowance for a growing
lad. Indeed, I frequently managed to get through my three days' bread in
one; but as we could get fish for a mere song, and as the gardens of our
neighbours, the Dutchmen, supplied us with potatoes, we continued, one
way or another, to fare tolerably well at this station.

We were soon after moved to the station of Muisenberg, seven miles
nearer to Cape Town, a post defended by a small battery, and the beach,
in places of easy access, guarded by a few guns. The road from Simon's
Town to Muisenberg sometimes runs along the beach, which is very flat,
and on which the sea flows with gentle undulations; and, at others,
winds round the feet of craggy hills, covered with masses of stone,
which have the appearance of being merely suspended in the air, ready to
be rolled down upon you by the slightest touch. On these hills whole
regiments of baboons assemble, for which this station is particularly
famous. They stand six feet high, and in features and manners approach
nearer to the human species than any other quadruped I have ever seen.
These rascals, who are most abominable thieves, used to annoy us
exceedingly. Our barracks were under the hills, and when we went to
parade, we were invariably obliged to leave armed men for the protection
of our property; and, even in spite of this, they have frequently stolen
our blankets and great-coats, or anything else they could lay their
claws on. A poor woman, a soldier's wife, had washed her blanket and
hung it out to dry, when some of these miscreants, who were ever on the
watch, stole it, and ran off with it into the hills, which are high and
woody. This drew upon them the indignation of the regiment, and we
formed a strong party, armed with sticks and stones, to attack them,
with the view of recovering the property, and inflicting such
chastisement as might be a warning to them for the future. I was on the
advance, with about twenty men, and I made a _détour_ to cut them off
from caverns to which they always flew for shelter. They observed my
movement, and immediately detached about fifty to guard the entrance,
while the others kept their post, and we could distinctly see them
collecting large stones and other missiles. One old grey-headed one, in
particular, who often paid us a visit to the barracks, and was known by
the name of Father Murphy, was seen distributing his orders, and
planning the attack, with the judgment of one of our best generals.
Finding that my design was defeated, I joined the main body, and rushed
on to the attack, when a scream from Father Murphy was the signal for a
general encounter, and the host of baboons under his command rolled down
enormous stones upon us, so that we were obliged to give up the contest,
or some of us must inevitably have been killed. They actually followed
us to our very doors, shouting an indication of victory; and, during the
whole night, we heard dreadful yells and screaming; so much so, that we
expected a night attack. In the morning, however, we found that all this
rioting had been created by disputes about the division of the blanket,
for we saw eight or ten of them with pieces of it on their backs, as old
women wear their cloaks. Amongst the number strutted Father Murphy.
These rascals annoyed us day and night, and we dared not venture out
unless a party of five or six went together.

One morning, Father Murphy had the consummate impudence to walk straight
into the Grenadier barracks, and he was in the very act of purloining a
sergeant's regimental coat, when a corporal's guard, which had just been
relieved, took the liberty of stopping the gentleman at the door, and
secured him. He was a most powerful brute, and, I am persuaded, too much
for any single man. Notwithstanding his frequent misdemeanours, we did
not like to kill the poor creature; so, having first taken the
precaution of muzzling him, we determined on shaving his head and face,
and then turning him loose. To this ceremony, strange to say, he
submitted very quietly, and, when shaved, he was really an exceedingly
good-looking fellow; and I have seen many a "blood" in Bond Street not
half so prepossessing in his appearance. We then started him up the
hill, though he seemed rather reluctant to leave us. Some of his
companions came down to meet him; but, from the alteration which shaving
his head and face had made in him, they did not know him again, and,
accordingly, pelted him with stones, and beat him with sticks, in so
unmerciful a manner, that poor Father Murphy actually sought protection
from his enemies, and he in time became quite domesticated and tame.

We soon bade farewell to Muisenberg, and marched to Wynberg, and were in
camp for several months. Here we suffered dreadfully from the inclemency
of the weather, and from lying on damp ground, in small bell tents;
added to which, our very lives were drilled out by brigade field-days,
from three and four o'clock in the morning, until seven and eight
o'clock at night. At this period the Caffres were committing the most
terrific murders and robberies amongst the Dutch boers up the country.
To stop these devastations, a rifle company was formed from the several
corps of the 8th Dragoons, and the 22nd, 34th, 65th, 81st, and 91st
regiments, and placed under the command of Captain Effingham Lindsay,
one of the bravest soldiers in his majesty's army. We were dressed in
green, and our pieces were browned to prevent their being seen in the
woods where the Caffres congregated. About three months after the
formation of the company, we were sent up the country, in conjunction
with the light company of the 91st regiment and a corps of Hottentots.
We embarked on board the _Diamond_ frigate, and reached Algoa Bay in
fourteen days, having experienced bad weather.[7] From thence we marched
to Graaf-Reynett, about five or six hundred miles in the interior, and
fifteen hundred miles from Cape Town, and took up our quarters in a
Dutch church. The road from Algoa Bay to Graaf-Reynett is hill and dale,
and infested with lions, tigers, hyenas, wolves, and elephants; and we
frequently saw eight or ten a-day, at a place called Rovee Bank, a day's
march on this side of the great pass. One day I went out shooting wild
ducks here with another person. We came to a pool of water, surrounded
with very high grass--some of it ten feet high--which abounded with wild
ducks and geese. I took aim and fired, and had just time to see, that at
least one bird had fallen a victim to number four, when I heard a most
tremendous roar, and the whole pool was in a moment in a state of
commotion. I was in the act of plunging into the water after my
butchered duck, when, imagine my astonishment and alarm, on seeing an
enormous white elephant rush out from the high grass, roaring loudly,
and striking the grass aside with his trunk. Neither myself nor my
companion had ever seen one before, and we had now no inclination for a
second peep; so, leaving the ducks to their fate, we took to our heels,
and never stopped till we arrived safe in camp.

At every farmer's house on our line of march, we found sad vestiges of
murder and desolation. Whole families had been wantonly massacred by
this wild and misguided race of people, whose devastations it was now
our duty to check, and whose ignorance is so extraordinary, that I am
persuaded they are insensible that murder is a crime. Beautiful
farmhouses were to be still seen smoking; the families either murdered,
or run away to seek refuge elsewhere. Not a living creature was to be
seen, unless, perchance, a poor dog might be discovered howling over the
dead body of his master; or some wounded horse or ox, groaning with the
stab of a spear or other mutilation. The savage Caffre exults in these
appalling sights; gaping wounds, and the pangs of the dying, are to his
dark and infatuated mind the very acme of enjoyment. This barbarous
race, when they have succeeded in any of their murderous exploits,
appear to be so excited to ecstasy, that they will jump about in a sort
of frenzy, hurling their spears in all directions, and in the most
reckless manner, either at man or beast. They are quite insensible to
the value of money, which they would accept on account of its glitter
only; while a more shining gilt button would be prized by them as of
inestimable value. In short, they seem scarcely to possess a rational
idea beyond what may tend to the gratification of the appetite; and I
have myself seen them with women's gowns, petticoats, shawls, &c, tied
round their legs, and between their toes, and in this manner they would
run wildly into the woods, shouting in exultation. These people had got
information that we were their avowed enemies, and come to destroy them
and take from them their enormous herds of cattle; they were, therefore,
driven far into the interior of almost inaccessible parts of the
country, where we could not follow them. Some few stragglers were left
in the neighbourhood, to watch our movements, with whom we had some
slight skirmishes; but, from the extreme intricacy of the woods, we
could do but little with them.

The Caffres may unquestionably be considered as a formidable enemy. They
are inured to war and plunder, and most of them are such famous marksmen
with their darts, that they will make sure of their aim at sixty or
eighty paces' distance. When you fire upon them they will throw
themselves flat upon their faces, and thus avoid the ball; and, even if
you hit them, it is doubtful whether the ball would take effect, the
skins worn by them being considered to be ball-proof. Added to this, as
they reside in woods, in the most inaccessible parts of which they take
refuge on being hard pressed by their enemies, an offensive warfare
against them is inconceivably arduous.

Before they deliver the darts with which they are armed, they run
sideways; the left shoulder projected forward, and the right
considerably lowered, with the right hand extended behind them, the dart
lying flat in the palm of the hand, the point near the right eye. When
discharged from the grasp, it flies with such velocity that you can
scarcely see it, and when in the air it looks like a shuttlecock
violently struck. They carry, slung on their backs, about a dozen of
these weapons, with which single men have been known to kill lions and
tigers.

From this harassing warfare, travelling through almost impenetrable
woods, over tremendous hills, and through rivers, we were soon in a
terribly ragged condition. Our shoes we managed to replace from the raw
hides of buffaloes, in the following manner: the foot was placed on the
hide, which was then cut to the shape of the sole, and fastened to the
foot by thongs made of the same material, sewed to the sole instead of
upper-leathers. In two or three days this dried, and formed to the shape
of the foot, and was sure to be a fit. When we had remained at this
station about two years, it was truly laughable to see the
metamorphosis of the once white regimental trousers. Here and there
pieces had been sewn in to patch up holes, and, these pieces being of
materials of other texture as well as other colours, we looked, at a
distance, like spotted leopards. During these two years I had sprung up
some six inches, outgrowing, of course, both my jacket and trousers;
and, when I was in full case for parade, my figure must have been
exceedingly ludicrous. My jacket was literally a strait jacket; for,
from its extreme tightness, I could scarcely raise my hand to my head.
My pantaloons or trousers had been, during the whole period, continually
rising in the world, and now they would scarcely condescend to protect
my protruding knees. I was but a novice at the needle, so that the
patches I put on were either too small or too large. In this predicament
I had to march nearly fifteen hundred miles through Africa. The rest of
the men were but little better off; and we might well have been compared
to Falstaff's ragged recruits, with whom he swore he would not march
through Coventry.

Having continued on this duty for upwards of two years, to very little
purpose, the Cape of Good Hope was ordered, by the British Government,
in 1801, to be given up to the Dutch. To remove the rifle company, and
the light company of the 91st Foot, a small vessel was dispatched from
Cape Town to Algoa Bay, for their conveyance to the capital, preparatory
to embarking for India. I was dispatched over land with a Dutch boer's
family, then about to leave the station for Cape Town. The whole of the
officers' baggage was committed to my care, which was a very serious
charge and responsibility, through such a wild and desolate country. On
this trip I had to pass along the margin of the country inhabited by the
Caffres; and, although the Dutch family with whom I travelled had
muskets and four waggons, these sojourners in the woods and hills
neither feared them nor their guns. After laying in a good stock of
powder and shot, we commenced our march in regular battle array. I was
mounted on a horse, with my rifle slung over my back, always loaded, and
a pistol in my holster-pipe; on each side rode the Dutchman's two sons;
after us, four Hottentots, armed with muskets; then the old boss (the
master); and, following him, the four waggons, containing the families
and property of all. The rear-guard consisted of two head servants
(Hottentots) armed, on bullocks; then four on foot, with their families,
many of the women carrying two children. Thus we would accomplish twenty
miles a day over the most enormous hills; and, if we could not reach a
farmhouse by the setting sun, which was the time we generally halted, we
selected the most open spot we could find for our encampment, forming a
square with the four waggons, keeping our cattle inside, where they were
fed. Six men out of the twelve kept watch the whole night, and were
relieved every four hours, in which duty I always took a part. In fact,
we were so often disturbed, either by the Caffres, or some beast of prey
prowling about our little fortified encampment, that we might be said to
be always watching. The Caffre possesses a great deal of cunning and
craft. Their system of attack is this: under the garb of night, when all
is still save the roaring lion, the hungry tiger, or the screeching owl,
they will crawl on their hands and knees, imitating the cries of any
animal of the woods, or any bird of the air. At the smallest noise they
will turn themselves flat on the ground, so that you may walk close by,
and not observe them; and the first indication given you of having such
dangerous neighbours, is by the incision of a spear, or the blow of a
club. These imitations of the cries of animals, and chirping of birds,
are well understood amongst themselves. No wonder, then, that we should
watch. It was no unusual thing in the morning to see their spears lodged
in the top of our waggons, and close by where we kept watch; but we
never attempted to leave our possessions, and resolved not to throw away
our precious powder and ball on slight occasions. To narrate the
numerous trials, watchings, privations, perils, and escapes of this
trip, would of itself fill a larger space than I can devote to such a
detail. Suffice it for the present, that we at last reached Cape Town in
safety.

The Dutchman with whom I was travelling had two daughters; the younger
of whom, Sabina by name, was a most lovely creature. She was tall, and
rather slim; of symmetrical form; in complexion a brunette; with black
eyes and hair; her foot extremely small; and her waist scarcely a span.
Her manners were vivacious and interesting, and her education had been
by no means neglected. As we proceeded on our perilous journey, this
charming girl would single me out as her companion, and seek consolation
in my society and conversation, from the coarseness of her father, who
was a very gross man. It need scarcely be confessed by me, that I was
nothing loth to be thus distinguished; neither can it reasonably be
expected that I was long insensible to the charms of my amiable
companion. I would walk by her side, while she rode my horse the whole
march; and in this manner, day after day passed away like so many hours,
and our attachment grew stronger and stronger, and at length settled
into a deep-rooted affection, and was cemented by an interchange of
protestations of mutual love. She was a year younger than I; my age
being then sixteen, and hers fifteen; but the appearance of both was far
beyond that tender age.

Convinced of the reciprocity of our attachment, thus we journeyed on,
indulging in visions of bliss; and it was not until we had approached
within a short distance of our destination, that the idea first crossed
my mind that we must soon part. Until this moment all my faculties had
yielded to the fascinations of my enslaver, from the contemplation of
whose beauty it had seemed treason to steal a thought; but, now that the
time approached when my duty must tear me from her, and when I
reflected, that from that duty there was no possibility of shrinking,
without disgrace, the absolute necessity of separation from my beloved
Sabina rushed upon my senses, and almost drove me to despair. These
bitter thoughts having thus suddenly and painfully intruded, I revolved
within my mind, in all ways, the possibilities of extricating myself
from my perplexing situation; and the more I reflected, the more was I
distressed and embarrassed. Marriage would not have been consented to by
my commanding officer, on account of my extreme youth; the thought of
any less honourable proposal I could not myself encourage for a moment;
and, in short, it soon became clear to me, that there was but one road
of escape from the heart-rending necessity of parting at once, and for
ever, from my lovely brunette--desertion. The idea of being compelled to
resort to such an alternative startled me; I knew the enormity of the
offence, and the consequences of such a step; but the recollection that
it was my only resource, haunted me day and night. As often as it
intruded upon my distracted mind, I endeavoured to drive it from me; but
it stuck to me like ivy on the crumbling tower. What to do I could not
resolve. I at last mentioned the subject to Sabina, and it seemed that
the thought of our approaching separation had been by her also forgotten
in our mutual love. The moment I hinted at the possibility of parting,
she turned as pale as death; I saw the crystal tear steal down her
beautiful cheek; she trembled; and at last swooned away. It was then the
dark fiend again urged me on, and I promised, in the moment of grief and
excitement, that I would desert, and follow her wherever she might go.
Her sweet eye beamed ineffable pleasure; she seized my hand; kissed it a
hundred times; and she said, in a most pathetic manner, "Will you really
return with me to my home?" I declared I would, whatever might be the
result. She said, "Swear it, and I shall live; deny me, and I shall
die." The concluding part of this appeal was urged with such a searching
anguish, that it drew from me a solemn promise of desertion. This
resolution was communicated to her family; and one and all urged me to
go, or rather return with them to their homes--pointing out the
happiness I should enjoy with their beautiful sister. These were
arguments too cogent to be resisted, and I again promised to return with
them. Scarcely had the fatal promise been repeated, when the
recollection of my native country, my home, my country's glory, my
regiment, and the disgrace attaching to the committal of so bad a crime,
all rushed in quick succession upon my bewildered mind. I thought--I
paused; but a single glance from the eye of my beloved Sabina plainly
told me that the first whisper of love would suffice to confirm me in my
fatal resolution.

We were now within sight of Cape Town; and here again my feelings,
distressed at the thought of deserting, goaded me beyond description. I
sometimes gave up the idea, and resolved to fly from temptation, and
seek protection with my regiment; but the melodious voice of Sabina
calling me by name, would at once dissipate my better resolutions, until
I at last abandoned all idea of the possibility of parting. I contented
myself with praying most devoutly that the regiment might have sailed
ere I arrived, which would have saved me from the stigma of desertion.
In the event of the regiment being still at Cape Town, I had sworn to my
betrothed and her family to return to them: thus we parted. My arrival
was hailed by my comrades with delight, as they feared I had been
murdered by the Caffres; and I received every kind of congratulation,
and several very handsome presents, from all those officers whose things
I had in charge. Some hundred miles before I had reached Cape Town, the
old Dutchman had tried hard to persuade me to remain behind, with all
the property, till he and his family returned. This I resolutely
refused: desertion was of itself bad enough, without adding to it the
crimes of breach of trust and theft. I had not, in our long and arduous
march, lost or injured a single thing, but delivered them all safe into
the custody of their rightful owners, and in the evening went to see my
Sabina at her friend's house, where I was informed that the family
proposed leaving Cape Town for their home on the following Monday. After
a severe struggle, I consented to accompany them; for which purpose I
stole out of the barracks after hours, and joined them at the appointed
place outside the town. I need not say my arrival was hailed with
delight, for I had kept them waiting an hour beyond the appointed time;
Sabina locked her arm in mine; the procession moved on; and in my
excessive love I forgot my crime. Reader, judge me not too harshly;
consider my youth, and the temptation I had to contend against; and,
before you utterly condemn me, place yourself under the same combination
of circumstances, and tell me how you would have acted in my place.

We had proceeded about thirty miles from Cape Town, and were busily
engaged building castles of future bliss, when--oh, short-sighted
mortals!--the provost-marshal thrust his head into the waggon, and
pointed a pistol at me, saying, if I attempted to move, he would shoot
me. This mandate was too pointed to be disobeyed; and, in ten minutes
after, I was on my way back to Cape Town, having been dragged from the
embraces of her for whom I had sacrificed my all. From that moment I
never saw or heard of the fair Sabina or her family, who would also
undoubtedly have been seized, but that I took all the blame upon my own
shoulders. I was tried by a regimental court-martial for being absent
from morning parade, and for desertion, and sentenced to receive 999
lashes, being more than fifty lashes for every year I was old; but my
commanding officer was a kind and affectionate man, and had known me
from the day I entered his regiment; he could not consent that I should
receive a single lash, but sent for me, and admonished me like a parent,
painted the crime of desertion in all its enormities, and dismissed me,
with the assurance of his full forgiveness and friendship; adding, that
he was assured I had been deluded away by the Dutchman and his family.
This I never would acknowledge, until some months afterward, when,
knowing that they must be far out of our reach, I related the whole
transaction.

Some of the Dutch troops, to whom we were to resign the Cape, had
already arrived from Java and Batavia, and other Dutch settlements, many
of whom flocked to the wharf to see us embark, and, where they dared, to
offer insults. A huge brute sidled up to me, with his greasy mustaches,
which he began to curl and twist between his forefinger and thumb, at
the same time chucking me under the chin, and calling me a pretty boy.
For this I took the liberty of saluting him with a kick on the shins,
for which he attempted to seize my ears; but I fixed my bayonet--a
weapon the Dutch have a great aversion to; so he marched off. The
following morning we embarked for India, on board a small American
vessel that had been lying a considerable time at the Cape.

When the land was buried in distance, I could not help reviewing the
many providential escapes I had already experienced during my short
career, and the mercies that had been extended to me in the most
perilous situations. Did men but oftener attribute them to that great
source from whence all our mercies are derived, we should think less of
our often fancied hardships, and feel grateful for the blessings we
enjoy. In my case, it was impossible to look back upon the last four
years of my life, without trembling at the scenes I had been carried
through in safety, and addressing a prayer of thanksgiving to the
fountain of all love, for the unmerited protection that had been
extended towards me.

We had scarcely got to sea a day, when we found that it was a difficult
matter to determine which was the more cranky, the vessel or the
captain. She took in water in large quantities--he grog; she would not
go steady--neither would he; she rolled and pitched--so did he; she
shook her head--so did he; she was often sea-sick--so was he: in fact,
they were a cranky pair. She had lain so long at the Cape, that her
bottom had become foul, and she would not go more than four knots an
hour, if it blew a hurricane, and then she seemed to tear the very water
asunder. We prowled about the deep like the wandering Jew on earth,
until at last our water began to evince symptoms of decline, and it was
justly feared we should soon suffer much under a hot sun, for want of
that great essential; but, about a week after, we stumbled upon land,
which, after a great deal of reconnoitring, our wise captain pronounced
to be some part of Sumatra. However this might be, it was a welcome
sight to us; but, as it was late in the evening when we discovered it,
we were obliged to steer about the whole night. About ten o'clock the
clouds began to thicken, and the wind blew from shore; about twelve it
blew a smart gale, and we hove to; our vessel lay like a log of wood,
scarcely moving, till the morning dawned, when the storm had subsided in
a great degree, and we stood in for land. The hills looked woody, and
the valleys fertile. We at last got into a small bay, or basin, where
the surrounding scenery was beautiful in the extreme. Several canoes
were to be seen steering up the creeks, and men and women running into
the woods, in seeming alarm and consternation. We anchored about three
hundred yards from the shore. The movements of the natives did not
evince any friendly inclination towards us, but the contrary; and it was
fortunate that we had the means of taking by compulsion what we should
willingly have purchased--wood and water, those two essentials to man's
existence. To convince them, if possible, that our appearance in this
basin was not of a hostile nature, a small boat was dispatched, with six
or seven men, four of them armed. I was one, and we approached the shore
with great caution. We could plainly see people hiding behind trees, and
carrying away their moveables from some huts which stood about two
hundred yards from shore, where we could also discover fishing-nets,
canoes that had been dragged ashore, a few domestic fowls, and one or
two goats and kids. We beckoned them to approach, but they seemed shy,
and would not come near us. The captain's servant was a native of
Ceylon, and could speak several languages. We landed him, but he was
justly afraid to venture far from the boat. He soon, however, made them
understand the object for which we put into this port, and informed them
that we were willing to purchase both wood and water at a reasonable
price. This they would not consent to, but requested us immediately to
weigh anchor and leave the bay, or dread the displeasure of their king,
whom they had apprised of our intrusion into their country. It appeared
from this that we had no alternative but to take what we required by
force; we therefore disregarded the threats of the subjects of his black
majesty, and the following morning got out the long-boat, with
implements for getting in water and cutting wood. The latter was already
cut to our hands, as the surrounding country was one mass of fuel, that
had decayed, and been blown down by the tempest. The water was close
by--a most beautiful crystal stream; but the moment we had commenced
work, we saw an enormous number of people, with swords, spears, and
daggers, approaching towards us. We formed a line, primed and loaded,
and prepared for a fight; but, resolved not to be the aggressors, we
again dispatched the native servant to endeavour to reason them into
compliance; for which purpose, a small safeguard went with him. After a
great deal of threatening and blustering, they consented to sell the
water for five dollars per butt, and the wood in proportion. This
exorbitant claim was of course rejected with indignation; but, still
wishing to keep friendly with them, we offered one dollar per butt. This
was refused by them, and the servant returned. Meantime, we continued
filling our water utensils and collecting firewood, with the greatest
industry, keeping our eyes on them all the while. There appeared to be a
deal of consultation among the natives, and a number of messengers going
and coming; at last an arrow was fired, which fell close to where I was
standing. Another soon followed it; and the officer in command of our
party then ordered two or three men to fire in the air. This alarmed
them so, that they took to their heels and ran shouting into the woods,
and we went hard to work. In about an hour, the inhabitants, encouraged
by our pacific appearance, sent a man to inform us, that "his majesty
had been pleased to permit the strangers to tread upon the margin of his
country, and drink his water of mercy" (so interpreted by the native
servant), and that "his majesty would come and hold communion of
friendship with the strangers on the following day, if the day was
auspicious; that we might drink as much water of his mercy as we
pleased, and cut as much wood; but his majesty begged we would not
attempt to make incursions into his country, as he could not be held
responsible, if his elephants and bull-dogs got loose, and destroyed the
strangers; and further, that he would, in his most gracious mercy, send
us all sorts of fruits, &c., at a moderate price." To this message we
returned a very gracious answer; and about ten the following morning a
great number of boats were seen coming down the several creeks, which,
concentrating at the bottom of a small village a little way up the
largest creek, at last came on their way towards the ship, in number
about thirty, with about four men in each boat. It had been before
understood that not one person would be admitted with arms, and only ten
people at a time. His majesty did not choose to make his appearance, but
had instructed those that did come to say, that he had consulted his
diviners, and they had pronounced the day an inauspicious one. We were,
therefore, deprived of his royal presence; but, if he was as big a thief
as those he sent to represent him, his majesty was qualified for a more
exalted sphere--the gallows: such a set of rogues I have never seen in
the whole course of my life. They brought oranges, plantains, &c., and
some few ducks, chickens, and eggs, for barter; but they were such
thieves that you could not trust them even to handle the article you
wished to barter. If you trusted it out of your own hand, it was handed
by them from one to another, and ultimately to their canoes, and then
you might "fish for it," to use a soldier's term. A ludicrous scene took
place between a tar and one of these fellows. Jack offered his blanket
for sale, as he had now got into a warm climate, and it was of no
further use to him. Jack, in good, sound, and intelligible English,
particularized the length, breadth, and quality of his blanket,
qualifying his description with many an oath, not one syllable of which
did the purchaser understand. During the examination of the said
blanket, Jack kept hold of one end, pledging his tarry honour to the
authenticity of his assertion that it was a real Witney. Some one at
this moment took off Jack's attention, and he withdrew his hand from the
blanket, which soon found its way to the canoe. The tar uttered sundry
imprecations touching his "day-lights" and "grappling-irons," and was up
on deck and down into the canoe in a moment, overhauling everything; but
neither the blanket nor the purchaser was to be found. At this the
sailor ran about like a madman, until, at last, he espied the fellow
moving down the fore-hatchway. Being certain of his man, he took one
hop, skip, and jump, and fastened on the fellow's neck, vociferating,
"Halloa, shipmate, where have you stowed my blanket? Come, skull it
over, or I shall board you before you can say luff." The fellow did not,
of course, understand one word he said; but Jack soon brought him to his
bearings, as he called it, by mooring him on the deck, and swearing
that, if he did not "skull over the Witney," he would tear him into
rope-yarns. Thus roughly treated, poor blacky bellowed out lustily for
mercy, which brought down the first officer, who asked Jack Carter (for
that was his name) what was the matter. He replied, "This here black
rascal has grappled my blanket, so I am just after boarding him, and, if
he don't shore it out, I'll sink him, or Jack Carter is no sailor." Here
he commenced hammering his head against the deck, until the knave said
something to one of his countrymen, who ran forward where his canoe was,
and put an end to the dispute by producing the Witney.

The following day we again bent our way towards India, with light hearts
and cheerful countenances. We soon reached the Pilot, cruising off the
sand-heads of Saugar, and steered our way up the river Hoogley. This
river is wide, and its current powerful. The views on each side, when
you get as far as Fultah, are romantic, and we gratified our eyes in
feasting on nature's beauties. On rounding the corner, or protruding
neck of land, on which stand the company's botanical gardens, Fort
William first appears; then Calcutta, with its innumerable shipping,
bursts upon the view, and the beholder gazes on the beautiful
fortification of the fort, and the city of palaces, with astonishment
and delight. We passed the fort in full sail, and were hailed from its
ramparts by the artillery, and part of the 10th regiment of Foot, then
in garrison there. We returned the welcome greeting with three loud
cheers, and in five minutes after came to anchor off Esplanade Ghaut,
after a voyage of more than five months.

[Illustration]

[Illustration]

FOOTNOTES:

[7] Previous to the arrival of the British in 1795, an agreement between
the Dutch and Caffres had recognized the line of the Sunday's River,
between Graaf-Reynett and Algoa Bay, as the colonial boundary. The
reader may be reminded that the British occupied the Cape Colony in
1795; restored it to the Dutch at the Peace of Amiens; and retook it in
1806.--ED.




CHAPTER VI.


The instant the anchor was gone, boats were alongside, for the purpose
of conveying the two companies ashore; and, in a couple of hours, we
were safely lodged in our quarters at Fort William. Here the five
companies of his majesty's 10th regiment of Foot joined our lads, with
bottles of rum, and a scene ensued that was beyond description;
drinking, singing, dancing, shouting, fighting, and bottles flying in
all directions. The sight was terrific; so I marched off to the bazaar,
to get out of the bustle; went round the fort, and visited everything
worth seeing. On my return to the barracks, I found the men lying in a
state of the most disgusting drunkenness; some on the floor, others on
cots, trunks, and boxes. In those days, I knew not the taste of
spirituous liquors; and, indeed, for years after: consequently, instead
of joining those scenes of revelry and discord, they were to me
offensive and disgusting in the extreme. The very smell of arrack would
at any time drive me from the barrack, and many a night have I slept in
the open air, to avoid the fumes arising from its use, as well as the
drunken jargon of those who drank it to excess.

I had now attained the age of eighteen years; was healthy and active; a
zealous, though very humble member of the profession I had chosen; and
an ardent aspirant to share in my country's glory. With these feelings
and qualifications, assuring myself that, now I was in India, I was in
the wide field of promise, I began to revolve in my mind if I could not
better my situation. I was then fifer and bugler in the light company,
the kind captain of which, seeing my anxious spirit, generously
undertook to improve me in reading and writing, of which I at that time
knew but little. In the course of one year's close application, I so
much improved as to keep his books of the company and his own private
accounts. I then begged of him that I might be removed from the drummers
to the ranks. I did not like the appellation drum-_boy_. As I have seen
many a man riding post, who was at least sixty years old, still called a
post-boy, so, if a drummer had attained the age of Methusaleh, he would
never acquire any other title than drum-boy. Indeed, there were many
other things I could never bring myself to relish in any eminent degree:
such as flogging--to say nothing of being flogged--and dancing
attendance on a capricious sergeant-major, or his more consequential
spouse, who is queen of the soldiers' wives, and mother of tipplers, and
an invitation-card from whom to tea and cards is considered a ponderous
obligation.

In about a week after having made this request, I was transferred from
the drummers' room, and promoted to the rank of corporal. This was
promotion indeed--three steps in one day! From drum-boy to private; from
a battalion company to the Light Bobs; and from private to corporal. I
was not long before I paraded myself in the tailor's shop, and tipped
the master-snip a rupee to give me a good and neat cut, such as became a
full corporal. By evening parade my blushing honours came thick upon me.
The captain came upon parade, and read aloud the regimental orders of
the day, laying great stress upon, "to the rank of corporal, and to be
obeyed accordingly." I was on the right of the company, being the
tallest man on parade, when I was desired by the captain to fall out,
and give the time. I did so, and never did a fugleman cut more capers;
but here an awkward accident happened. In shouldering arms, I elevated
my left hand high in the air; extended my leg in an oblique direction,
with the point of my toe just touching the ground; but in throwing the
musket up in a fugle-like manner, the cock caught the bottom of my
jacket, and down came brown Bess flat upon my toes, to the great
amusement of the tittering company. I must confess, I felt queer; but I
soon recovered my piece and my gravity, and all went on smoothly, till I
got into the barracks, where a quick hedge-firing commenced from all
quarters; such as, "Shoulder _hems_!"--"Shoulder _hems_!"--"Twig the
fugleman!" This file-firing increased to volleys, till I was obliged to
exert my authority by threatening them with the guard-house, for riotous
conduct; but this only increased the merriment, so I pocketed the
affront, as the easiest and most good-natured mode of escape; my
persecutors ceased, and thus ended my first parade as a non-commissioned
officer.

In my new sphere of life I now felt that there was, unquestionably, some
satisfaction derivable from being

    "Clothed in a little brief authority."

A corporal has to take command of small guards; is privileged to visit
the sentinels whenever he pleases; his suggestions are frequently
attended to by his superiors; and his orders must be promptly obeyed by
those below him. There is certainly a pleasure in all this, and a man
rises proportionately in his own esteem. In short, to confess the truth
I now looked upon a drum-boy as little better than his drum.

Full of the importance of my situation and duties, thus passed the time
for nearly six months, at the end of which I was advanced to the rank of
sergeant, and, shortly afterwards, to that of pay-sergeant, in the same
regiment. The post of pay-sergeant is certainly one of importance, and
he who holds it a personage of no small consideration. He feeds and
clothes the men; lends them money at _moderate_ interest and on good
security; and sells them watches and seals, on credit, at a price
_somewhat_ above what they cost, to be sure, but the mere sight of
which, dangling from a man's fob, has been known to gain him the
character of a sober steady fellow, and one that should be set down for
promotion. Thus, at least, good may sometimes be educed from evil; and,
as it is not my intention to enter into a detail of the chicanery
practised among the minor ranks in the army, let it suffice that I never
served in a company in which every individual could not buy, sell,
exchange, lend, and borrow, on terms peculiar to themselves.

Shortly after my promotion, an order arrived for the two flank companies
of the regiment to proceed to join the army then in the field, with all
possible speed. We were to proceed by land, the distance about twelve
hundred miles, and the season winter. Every hand was busily engaged in
making the necessary preparations for the journey, equipping ourselves
as lightly as possible; when an unfortunate misunderstanding occurred,
which was but too likely, not only to prevent our journey, but to put an
end to some of our lives.

On the arrival of troops at Fort William, it had been the custom to stop
from each soldier of his majesty's army, eight rupees; but for what
purpose, strange to say, they were never told. This deduction had been
made from the pay of our two companies without any explanation; and, as
the men were now proceeding on active service, it was but right and
natural that they should desire to know (as we had been accustomed in
the regiment) why any part of this pay was withheld from them. They
called upon their officers for explanation, who were as much in the dark
as themselves. The greater part of the two companies then marched, in a
sober deliberate manner, towards Major-General Sir Hughen Bailey's
quarters, to seek redress. Here they were given to understand that the
sum of eight rupees was customary to be stopped from each soldier, to
insure him a decent burial. This explanation only added fuel to flame,
and excited in the hearts of the men--few of whom, poor fellows! ever
wanted burial, as will be seen in the sequel of this narrative--the
most bitter rancour against such a custom. The men returned to the
barracks: liquor was resorted to to feed the spark already kindled in
their bosoms; till at length they became bent upon open rebellion and
mutiny. This spirit, of disaffection was manifested most strongly in the
grenadier company. Both companies were doatingly fond of their officers,
who took great pains to explain to them that violent measures, and
taking the law into their own hands, would never be likely to get their
wrongs redressed; but that, on the contrary, those very acts deprived
them of the power of interceding for them, and explaining to the proper
authorities the grounds of their complaints. This timely explanation had
its due effect, and _we_ one and all (I mean the light company) said,
"March us before the enemy, that we may wipe away this our first
disobedience;" but those who had drank deeper of the poisonous cup of
rebellion, in the grenadier company, were still unappeased, and
spreading wide the infectious sparks of mutiny; so much so, that the
officers were again called in to quell them. Their colonel they loved
dearly--he was a father to his men; the adjutant they hated. On the
arrival of the former, the men became passive, and the tumult was
hushed; but, when the latter appeared, the shouting of, "Kick him
out!"--"Turn him out!" resounded through the barracks, and he had a
narrow escape for his life. When he had left, the tumult again ceased;
the men retired to their cots; and, in an hour, all was silent as the
grave. The next morning the eight rupees were refunded; and, on the
morning following, we left the fort, with the band of the regiment
playing us through Calcutta, where we were met and hailed by all
assembled. Every face smiled with joy; every breast beat high for glory.
The country through which we passed was fertile and well inhabited;
plenty smiled around, and all seemed peace and contentment. Here
presided English justice; the Pariah cottager was protected in his
reed-thatched hovel, and the ploughman was seen smiling over his nodding
crops. We lived like fighting-cocks; thought nothing of five or six and
twenty miles a day; every face wore the smile of contentment; all were
healthy; and the merry song and story beguiled some of our more dreary
night-marches. Thus merrily we reached the army, our marches averaging
twenty-six miles a day. We were met some miles from camp by his
excellency Lord Lake, the Commander-in-chief, who said that he was
delighted to see us. At this flattering greeting of the
commander-in-chief, we gave three cheers, in which his lordship and
staff heartily joined us. I must confess I felt at this moment
sensations I was a stranger to before--a kind of elevation of soul
indescribable, accompanied by a consciousness that I could either have
laughed heartily or cried bitterly. Nearer camp we were met and greeted
by nearly the whole European army. Such shouting and huzzaing I never
heard; nor could I have imagined that the mind of man could be worked up
to such a height of feeling. For myself, I could not help dropping a
tear--for what, I cannot tell; but so it was. On reaching the general
hospital, we saw many men without legs, some without arms, others with
their heads tied up; and it was a most affecting sight to behold these
poor wounded creatures waving their shattered stumps, and exerting their
feeble frames, to greet us warmly as we passed along. The scene that
followed would beggar description--drinking, dancing, shouting, that
made the Byannah Pass echo again! Reader, believe me when I assure you
that in those days I knew not, as I said before, the taste of spirituous
liquors; consequently, I did not join in these bacchanalian orgies, but
reconnoitred the camp, which, to my spirits, was far more exhilarating
than the jovial cup. Three days restored us to some kind of order and
discipline, and all went on smoothly.

Holkar, a Mahratta chieftain, was at this time in full force, with about
sixty thousand horse, and twenty-five thousand infantry, encamped a
short distance from us, ever on the alert to watch our movements, and
supported by Ameer-Khan and other self-created rajahs. From the very
nature of this service, against a flying enemy, thoroughly acquainted
with the localities of the country, we had but little chance of coming
up with them. Anything like a general engagement they studiously avoid;
plunder only is their aim. In this way they pay themselves, giving their
chiefs any great article of value that may fall into their hands; that
is to say, if they are known to have it. Their wives are excellent
horse-women, and many of them good shots with the matchlocks, and active
swords-women. They are always mounted on the best horse, and it is not
an unusual thing for them to carry one child before them and another
behind, at full speed. The Pindaree horsemen, and indeed all horsemen in
India, have a decided advantage over the English. Their horses are so
taught that they can turn them right round for fifty times, without the
horse's moving his hind legs from the same circle, or pull them up at
full speed instantaneously. Our horses are heavy, fat, and quite
unmanageable with the bit; it takes them as long to get round as a ship;
and you cannot pull them up under ten or twenty yards. Some of their
horsemen have spears seventeen feet in length, which they handle in so
masterly a style that singly they are dangerous persons to have anything
to say to: but I have frequently seen Lord Lake charge, with his
body-guard, a whole column of them, and put them to the rout.

A few days after our arrival, we moved on towards Jeypore, these
plundering rascals riding close by us, manoeuvring on our flanks, and
giving us a shot now and then, to let us know they wished to be
neighbourly. On one of these occasions it nearly cost me my life. We
were in column on one side of a field, near some high corn, called
juwar, about half a mile from our column on the other side of the field.
I had at this time the fastest pony in India, called "Apple," on which
I rode on ahead to the extreme end of the field, to have a shot at the
head of their line of march; for which imprudence my own life was nearly
the forfeit, for round the corner I came almost in contact with about a
hundred of the enemy. I soon wheeled round, and gallopped back again as
fast as my pony could carry me: they fired at me fifty or sixty shots,
not one of which touched me. Ever after, I kept a little more within
bounds.

We had frequent skirmishes with detached parties, killing numbers with
our six-pounders; but we could not come up with them. We therefore made
our way towards Muttra, a great haunt of the Pindarees, where we lay for
some time, trying to surprise them; but they were ever on the watch, as
the rattling of our swords might be heard a mile off. Tired of this
service, we took possession of the town of Muttra, driving them out.
Here we had glorious plunder--shawls, silks, satins, khemkaubs, money,
&c.; and some of the men made a good thing of it. I was not idle; but an
untoward circumstance for a time delayed my exertions. I was quartered
in a large square or rajah's palace, and had to ascend several flights
of steps to get at anything worth notice. All the way up this staircase
were little iron plated doors, locked with several locks. As Paul Pry
says, I thought this "rather mysterious"; I therefore commenced
locksmith, and knocked off the locks, when I found the rooms full of
bales of silk and shawls. I had just removed one of the largest bales
from the top, and was in the very act of walking off with it, when, on
turning round, a most brilliant eye met mine, set in one of the most
hideous heads I had ever beheld. What monster this could be I could not
at first imagine; nor did I stop very long to consider, but marched off
rather precipitately with my prize; being at the moment more frightened
than I was willing to confess, even to myself. On reflection, I was
ashamed of my fears; so, having "screwed my courage to the
sticking-post," in I marched again, with a drawn sword in my hand, and,
having convinced myself, by a second peep, that my friend with the
glaring eyes was no other personage than one of the gods Mahadooh, I
saluted him with a cut across his face for taking up his quarters in
that solitary place, and took the liberty of making free with all the
silks and shawls under his protection. A short time after, we returned
to quarters at Cawnpore, to spend the produce of our short campaign,
Holkar having retired to a distant part of India, to his winter
quarters.

Early in the following spring, our active enemy was again in the field,
and approaching the city of Delhi, where the inhabitants were not very
well disposed towards us, and in which we had but a small force of
native troops. We immediately marched, by forced marches, to their
relief, and found Mr. Holkar had been besieging that place, but that,
some two or three days before our arrival, he had raised the siege and
crossed the river Jumna; a necessary precaution on his part, for our
cavalry were lightly equipped. Colonel Burn, to his praise be it spoken,
was marching from the opposite direction towards Delhi, for the succour
of that place, with five companies of native infantry, when he
unfortunately fell in with the whole body of Holkar's cavalry; and,
wonderful to say, he made his retreat good to Shamlee, a large town,
fighting every inch of his way. There he took possession of a small
gurry, or mud fort, for the space of six days, defending himself against
an immense body of the enemy, suffering most dreadful privations, and
worn out by continual watching. The grand army crossed the Jumna, to the
rescue of Colonel Burn and his little band of native heroes, and in two
days afforded him the succour he so much wanted, having, with this view,
performed a distance of eighty-four miles in forty-eight hours. Never
shall I forget the cheering of the handful of men on the ramparts of
this little asylum. His lordship, to whom I was close, dropped the tear
of sympathy when waving his hat to them. I had that morning preceded the
army for the purpose of taking up the encampment; and, on the approach
of our advance-guard, some of the straggling enemy were seen loitering
behind the main body, who had marched early that morning. We had two
six-pounders with us, five troops of his majesty's 8th Light Dragoons,
five troops of his majesty's 24th Dragoons, with a regiment of native
cavalry; and we succeeded in killing a few of these marauders, who were
plundering and laying waste the whole country. We could always trace
their line of march by the dreadful destruction they had committed. Some
few sepoys were killed from the tops of the houses of Shamlee, many of
which were higher than the little fort. For this breach of good faith
his lordship gave up the town to plunder. The scene that followed would
take an abler pen than mine to describe:--breaking open houses and
boxes; tearing open bales of shawls, silks, and satins; and fighting
hand to hand: the tumult is inconceivable to any one who has not
witnessed such a scene. We marched the following morning, treading upon
the heels of the enemy: but, as they had a day's start of us, and their
horses will go from fifty to sixty miles a day, it was impossible for us
to come up with them.

On our road we passed several villages that had been burned to the
ground; poor, naked, and plundered creatures, men, women, and children;
burning corn-fields; dead elephants, camels, horses, and bullocks; and
the road was strewed with moah-berry, on which they feed their horses
for the purpose of making them drunk, in which state it is incredible
the astonishing distance they will go, though you can count their ribs a
mile off. The rear-guard of the enemy generally kept their eye on our
advance-guard, detaching parties on each of our flanks, and, by way of
amusement, giving us occasionally a shot. I recollect, on one of these
day's marches, a most impudent fellow, mounted on a beautiful horse, and
finely bedizened, came within two hundred yards of our column, passing
upon us some unpleasant epithets, and once or twice firing his
matchlock. He at last wounded a man of the native cavalry. This so
annoyed me that I asked his lordship if he would permit me to attack
him. His answer was, "Oh, never mind him, Shipp: we will catch him
before he is a week older." I never in my life felt more inclined to
disobey orders, for he was still capering close by us. An officer
commanding one of the six-pounders came up at the same time, and told
his lordship that, if he would permit him, he would knock him over, the
first shot, or lose his commission. His lordship said, "Well, try." At
this moment the fellow fired his matchlock again, and immediately
commenced reloading his piece. Our gun was unlimbered, laid, and fired;
the ball striking the horse's rump, passed through the man's back, and
the poor animal's neck, and we said, "So much for the Pin."

We marched, on the average, about twenty-five miles a day; but we were
obliged to push our poor horses on even faster than this, for Holkar was
making his way to Futtyghur, a small military station. This is a rich
city; and, no doubt, his inclination was to plunder and burn it. He
arrived at Furrackabad, about three or four miles from the above
station, the day before us, for the purpose of exacting money from the
rajah there. The little force at the station was withdrawn from the
barracks, and placed for the protection of the mint, which had a short
time before been established there. In the evening they arrived, and on
the morning of the same day we marched upwards of twenty miles, halted
till eight o'clock at night, then made ourselves as light as possible,
and again moved on, intending to surprise them before daylight the
following morning. We had twenty-eight miles to accomplish before that
time, and there is no doubt, from the judicious arrangement made for
this attack, by his excellency the commander-in-chief, that scarcely a man
would have escaped us, had not a most unfortunate circumstance occurred,
which was near destroying all our plans. An ammunition-tumbrel belonging
to one of our six-pounders, from the rapid rate at which we were moving,
blew up within half a mile of the enemy; who were buried in the arms of
sleep, they having made a forced march, so as to prevent the possibility
of our reaching them. This alarmed a few of those who happened to be
awake; but they supposed it the station-gun at Futtyghur. This
station-gun was really fired about ten minutes after, and some of them
got on the move; but thousands of them were still asleep. I would
recommend all officers who serve in India, to attack the enemy, if
possible, in the night. At this time it often happens that not a single
sentinel is to be found on the watch. This want of vigilance is to be
attributed to their eating and smoking too much opium, a practice
carried by them to such an excess as completely to deaden their
faculties; from which, their stupor in sleep is so extraordinary, that
if a gun were fired under a man's nose, he would scarcely have the power
to awake.

When the day dawned they were surrounded, and a general attack commenced
on all sides. Some were cut to pieces in their sleep, others in
endeavouring to escape. The carnage became terrific; his majesty's 8th,
24th, and 25th Dragoons, two regiments of native cavalry, and a corps of
horse-artillery, mowing them down with grape-shot in hundreds. About two
thousand were left dead on the field, and amongst the number several
poor tradespeople from Furrackabad, who had come to the spot to sell
their commodities. We pursued them many miles from the scene of action;
they, in their flight, burning the barracks and adjacent villages. The
same evening, or the following morning, the enemy reached the station of
Mainporee, a distance of seventy-two miles. At this station we had one
native corps only; but they were prepared to receive them. This little
band took possession of the house of the judge (Mr. Cunningham), and
defended themselves against Holkar's immense body of horse.

The battle of Furrackabad was on the 16th or 17th day of November,
1804; after which the enemy shifted their course towards the fort of
Deig, the property of the Bhurtpore rajah. In the neighbourhood were his
infantry, about twenty-five thousand men, with upwards of a hundred
pieces of cannon. Holkar little dreamt that, on the 13th of the same
month, his infantry had met with a similar defeat to that which his
cavalry had experienced on the 16th. Major-General Frazer, with a small
force, had completely routed and defeated them, taking all their guns
and stores. This action was at several intervals extremely doubtful, our
force being so inadequate to that of the enemy. We had no European
regiment there, except the Company's European regiment, and the 76th
Foot, both corps not more than six or seven hundred men. The enemy
sought protection under the walls of the fort; and, although our ally,
the governor of the fort of Deig, fired on our army, General Frazer,
seeing the danger of a defeat, charged at the head of the 76th,
supported by the European regiment and native troops, and succeeded in
driving them from their guns, and from the protection of the fort; but,
in the heat of the action, the gallant general received a ball in the
foot, and was obliged to retire from the field. He died a short time
afterwards. Colonel the Honourable W. Monson, on whom the command
devolved, completed his work, and a decisive victory was the result.
Holkar, being informed of the disaster of his infantry, then shifted his
course towards Bhurtpore, demanding immense sums of money from the
rajah, under threats of laying waste his country, which at that time
might be called the garden of India. His encampment was close under the
walls of the fort, leaving a body of about two thousand men to harass
and annoy us.

About the 18th of December we took up a position before the fort of
Deig, and in two days after broke ground against it. The two companies
to which I belonged led the column, carrying tools for working. The
night was as dark as pitch, and bitterly cold. Secrecy was the great
object of our mission, and we slowly approached the vicinity of the
fort, steering our course towards a small village about eight hundred
yards from the spot, where we halted under shelter from their guns. This
village had been set on fire two days before, and its inmates compelled
to take shelter in the fort. Small parties were dispatched in search of
eligible ground for trenches, and within breaking distance. I was
dispatched alone through the desolate village, to see what was on the
other side. I was yet but a novice in soldiering; and, believe me,
reader, I had no great fancy for this job; but an order could not be
disobeyed; so off I marched, my ears extended wide to catch the most
distant sound. I struck into a wide street, and, marching on tiptoe,
passed two or three poor solitary bullocks, who were dying for want of
food. These, startled me for the moment; but not another creature could
I see. I at one time thought I heard voices, and that I could see a blue
light burning on the fort, from which I inferred that I was getting
pretty close to it. Just as I had made up my mind that this must be the
case, I distinctly heard a voice calling out, "_Khon hie?_" in English,
"Who is there?" I was riveted to the spot, and could not move till the
words were repeated; when I stole behind one of the wings of a hut close
on my right. Soon after I heard the same man say, "_Quoi tah mea ne
deckah_;" which is, "I am sure I saw somebody." Another voice answered,
"_Guddah, hogah_;" which signifies, "A jackass, I suppose;" for there
were several wandering about. I fully agreed with the gentleman who
spoke last, but was determined to throw off the appellation as quickly
as possible, by endeavouring to find my way back. In attempting to make
my retreat with as little noise as possible, I put my foot into some
fire. This compelled me to withdraw rather precipitately, and they heard
me, when one of them said, "_Hi quoi_;" which is, "There certainly is
somebody." The other replied, "_Kis wastah nay tuckeet currah?_" "Why
don't you ascertain it, then?" Hearing this, I dashed into another hut,
and squatted myself down close, resolved at least to have a fight for
it. A man passed the door of the hut twice; but, at last, crying out,
"_Cally ek lungrah bile hie_," which signifies, "There is only one lame
bullock," he rejoined his party. The attempt to steal away in so dark a
night would have been impracticable; I must infallibly have been heard.
I resolved, therefore, to have a run for it, and off I bolted, up the
same street through which I had come, when a whole volley of matchlocks
was sent after me, but they did not attempt to follow--at least, as far
as I know, for I did not stop to look behind me. I arrived safe at the
division, not a little frightened; and I can venture to say that, the
elephant affair excepted, I never ran so fast before in my life. This
afterwards proved to be a strong cavalry piquet.

We at last took possession of the village, and established a depôt
there; and a rising ground about two or three hundred yards from it was
the spot selected for our batteries. We were at first heard, when the
fort commenced a heavy firing, but in the wrong direction. Every man was
employed in digging a sufficient space to lie down in; and, in the
course of a couple of hours, we were covered and protected from their
shot. We then erected batteries; and, by daylight in the morning,
everything was finished, and we were so close to the enemy that we could
distinctly hear English spoken,[8] and the _reveillée_ beaten.

On Christmas eve, as dark and cold a night as ever blew from the
heavens, the breach was reported practicable, and the rising of the moon
was a signal for marching to the storm. She did rise, in splendid
effulgence, over one of the highest bastions of the fort we were about
to storm; and we could see by her light, spears on the ramparts as thick
as plants in a new-set forest. We were now and then saluted with a
solitary gun from the fort, to let us know they were not asleep; blue
lights were seen burning on their ramparts, and they occasionally
indulged us with a rocket or two, which played beautifully in the air.

The soldiers, seeing I was a spirited youth, and a competitor with them
for glory, gave me a few salutary hints, especially an old veteran of
the 76th Foot, who had been then fighting about twenty years in the
East. Among the hints he gave me were these: 1st. Never to pass a man
lying down, or supposed to be dead, without giving him the point of the
bayonet or sword; for it was a common trick of theirs to lay themselves
down on your approach, and then to watch the opportunity of cutting you
down. 2nd. Whenever I saw a rocket or shell fall near me, to get as
close to it as possible, and lay myself flat on my face. This was
undoubtedly very excellent advice; but I soon got tired of killing dead
men, and lying down every time I saw a rocket; the having neglected to
do which, on one occasion, however, nearly cost me my life, which I
shall mention in its proper place.

The storming party consisted of about seven hundred men, composed of two
companies of his majesty's 22nd regiment, two of the Company's European
regiments, and the rest native troops, the whole under the command of
Colonel Ball, a brave old hero, but so feeble, that he was obliged to be
pushed up the track of glory. The two flank companies to which I
belonged led the column. Sergeant Bury, of the Grenadier company, headed
the foremost; but being wounded at the moment, he was compelled to leave
the battery. I volunteered to take his place. The enemy had a strong
intrenchment between our batteries and the breach, with innumerable
guns, so placed as to have a cross fire on the storming party. However,
we soon fought our way through their intrenchments, our gallant captain
(Lindsay) cheering, and boldly leading us on. Crossing these trenches,
this brave officer was cut with a spear in the arm, and also received a
severe wound from a sabre; but his gallantry and zeal were so great,
that he could not be prevailed upon to retire from the scene of action.
A little on our right I saw some of the enemy point a gun at us.
Immediately, with three or four comrades, I rushed out to spike it; for
which purpose, I was in the act of searching for the touchhole, to put a
nail in it, when one of the enemy's golundauze (artillery-men) fired the
gun off, and I was thrown on my back in the trench, and the same man was
in the act of cutting me to pieces, when a grenadier of our company,
named Shears, shot him, and I once more escaped. Fortunately for us, the
whole of the enemy's great guns were elevated too much, owing to which
the shots passed over our heads. If they had been properly directed, we
must have been annihilated to a man. Within fifty or sixty paces from
the breach, I received a matchlock ball in the head, which dropped me to
the ground, the blood flowing profusely. When I came a little to myself
from the stun, I found myself impelled onward by one of our companies,
who were close together, and running stooping, to avoid the shots,
which, being near the breach, were uncomfortably thick; but we reached,
and soon planted the British flag on the summit of the bastion which was
breached. Our opponents fought hard to resist our entrance, throwing
immense stones, pieces of trees, stink-pots, bundles of straw set on
fire, spears, large shots, &c.; but resistance was in vain: we were
determined to conquer. In spite of this laudable resolution, however, we
found some hard work cut out for us on making good our ascent. The
streets in the fort were narrow, running across each other, and every
ten yards guns were placed, for the purpose of raking the whole streets.
Added to this, many of the enemy had got into high houses, in which
there were loop-holes, from which they could fire down upon us, without
the possibility of our getting at them. Near the corner of a street, in
a kind of nook, I saw our dear Captain Lindsay attacked by five or six
of the enemy. He was on one knee, and quite exhausted, having lost much
blood from his former wounds; but, to our great joy, we were just in
time to save him, and punish some of his assailants. From the intricacy
of the place, we were afraid of shooting our own men, and were therefore
obliged to keep pretty close together. At midnight I again met Captain
Lindsay, clearing one of the streets, when he asked me how I felt
myself. I complained of a wound in my side, but said that I could find
no hole; but this was not a time for talking. In turning sharp down a
street rather larger than those we had cleared, we met a column of the
enemy, with a person of rank in a palanquin. We soon stopped his black
highness; and, to ascertain who was inside the palanquin, which was an
open one, I, with several others, probed our way with our bayonets, when
a tremendous fat zemindar (an officer) roared out most lustily, and
began to show fight. He fired a matchlock at me, which went through the
wing of my coat, but did not touch my person. Before I could retaliate,
my comrades had finished him, and we then commenced at the column; but I
took from the palanquin the gun which had nearly robbed me of life. It
was like the barrel of a gun, about two feet long, with a round handle;
at the handle end was a sharp hatchet; at the other extremity a sharp hook.
This extraordinary instrument I presented to the commander-in-chief; but
he refused the present, saying it was my trophy. His lordship was
afterwards prevailed on to purchase it, at the price of two hundred
rupees. We at this time got information that the five companies which
had deserted from the Honourable Colonel Monson, in his masterly retreat
from Jeypore, were standing, dressed in the full uniform they deserted
in, outside the principal gate of the fort, with their arms ordered,
without apparently making any resistance, and frequently crying out,
"Englishmen, Englishmen, pray do not kill us; for God's sake, do not
kill us." As these supplications proceeded rather from fear than from
penitence for the crime they had been guilty of--that of deserting to an
enemy--these men could expect no mercy. We had positive orders to give
them no quarter, and they were most of them shot.

About three o'clock, when I was completely tired and done up, I took my
station under the gable end of a brick building, and began to examine
the extent of my wounds. The one on the head was a bad one, having
touched the skull; it was about two inches long, and one broad, and I
was a little alarmed for the consequences. The wound which I supposed I
had received in the side, was nothing more than the wind of a
cannon-ball, which it was thought must have passed between my arm and
side. It was quite black, and much swollen, and on its margin there
appeared red streaks, which convinced the doctors that it was caused as
before stated. I felt it for months afterwards. The wound in my head had
been so long exposed to the night air, that, on examination by the
medical gentlemen, it was pronounced to be a dangerous one; but, with an
excellent constitution, and youth on my side, I soon recovered.

The killed found next morning exceeded the number of our storming party.
We had but few killed, but a great number wounded. Poor Sergeant Bury
found his way in, wounded as he was, before the whole company had
entered, and fought hard the whole night. Early in the morning he was
looking over the parapet of the fort, when a cannon-ball struck him on
the back, and killed him on the spot; otherwise he would have been
rewarded with a commission; but such is the fate of war! The taking of
this small redoubt was but a preparatory and necessary step before we
commenced a regular siege against the strong fort, and equally strong
town, both of which, however, they gave up, being fully satisfied of the
impossibility of holding either.

[Illustration]

FOOTNOTES:

[8] The English, which we were confident we heard spoken on this
occasion, was, no doubt, by a drummer who had deserted from the 76th
regiment, and who was afterwards found dead in the fort.

[Illustration: OFFICIAL PLAN OF THE SIEGE OF BHURTPORE, 1805.]




CHAPTER VII.


I was obliged to nurse myself a little, as the strong fortress of
Bhurtpore was, we understood, to be our next job.[9] Having but in part
led the last party in, I became a volunteer to lead the Forlorn Hope at
Bhurtpore. This offer his excellency, Lord Lake, accepted, with
encomiums on my zeal, and a promise that, if I escaped, I should have a
commission. We arrived before this place about the 29th day of December,
encamped about two miles from it, and immediately commenced our
operations against it. Holkar was lying under its walls, with his
immense body of cavalry, who committed every kind of cruelty on the
camp-followers that fell into their hands, such as cutting off their
hands from the first joint of the wrist, cutting off their noses, ears,
&c.; but seldom killing them outright.

During the preparation for the siege, when off duty I amused myself with
going out to the advanced piquets, where there were continual skirmishes
with Holkar's cavalry, who were always loitering about, day and night.
On one of these occasions I nearly paid dear for my imprudence. I
ventured far beyond the piquet, in hopes of picking off a fellow who was
showing off his horsemanship. As I was mounted on a good horse, and was
well armed, I rode after him, gaining ground fast; but, on looking
behind, I found myself a considerable distance from the piquet, and that
several horsemen had got between us, to prevent my return. To have run
away would have given them encouragement: no other remedy was left but
to dash through them. Our piquet, seeing my situation, got a
six-pounder, and fired a long shot at them. During the consternation
caused by the ball striking near them, and smothering them in dust, I
made the best use of my horse's legs, got safe to the piquet, and never
ventured so far from home again.

On the 1st day of January, 1805, we broke ground against this strong
fortress and town. I was again on the working party, my wound being
nearly closed. We halted near a wood; and, a party having been sent on
to reconnoitre, we at last pitched upon a place, and commenced our
nocturnal labours. We had not been at work ten minutes, when they heard
our working tools, and commenced a most terrific cannonade. We were
ordered to desist, and to lie down behind the earth we had thrown up,
which, fortunately for us, was of a sufficient thickness to be
musket-ball proof, or we must have suffered dreadfully; for their little
rough iron balls flew about as thick as bees. The cannon-shot were
generally high: some that fell short rolled, and were brought up by our
little mound of defence. They kept it up gloriously for half an hour,
conceiving that we intended to take them by surprise; but, from the
reports of this fortress containing 100,000 soldiers, and the enormous
sum of nineteen crore of rupees, our orders were to approach it by
regular siege. I fear I shall be thought rather tedious in relating the
disastrous events at this place; but we must take the gall with the
honey. The firing having ceased, except at intervals, we recommenced our
labours; and glad indeed were we to set blood again on the move. The
night was bitterly cold, and the ground damp; but we kept ourselves in
exercise with our work, and by daylight we had completed our trenches,
and four-gun breaching battery, within five hundred yards of the town
wall. The moment the day dawned, our night's work was observed. The fort
was again in a blaze; flags were hoisted; the parapet of the town wall
was one general mass of spears and little flags, as far as the eye could
reach; and the heads of soldiers studded the ramparts with variegated
colours--their turbans being generally of the most prominent dyes--red,
yellow, and pink. Such shouting, roaring of cannon, whistling of shot,
grumbling of rockets, and waving of flags and spears, made me reflect
for a moment on the folly of having ever sold my "leathers," to
participate in such a scene; but this thought was soon buried in the
shouts of defiance from our trenches. We did not show hands, as we had
none to spare; but as we were, of course, anxious to see what kind of a
place this said Bhurtpore was, we took every opportunity of peeping,
whenever we saw a gun fired, crying out, "Shot," which was a signal to
bob our heads. On the firing subsiding in the slightest degree, we
continued our work, and at length completed our batteries and magazines,
and widened our trenches to seven feet, leaving just sufficient room to
pass and repass, so as to communicate with our principal depôt under
shelter. During the whole of this day, the enemy kept up an almost
incessant fire, both with great guns and small arms, and we had some few
men wounded. A soldier of the light company, named Murphy, stood upon
the bank, exposing himself, and drawing upon us the fire from the fort.
Some of us remonstrated with him on his imprudence, when Paddy coolly
replied, "Never fear, honey; sure I have got my eye on them; and, if
they kill me, bad luck to me if I don't be after paying them for it when
I get into that same fort." In the course of the day he was shot in the
finger, for his disregard of our advice, which, he said, was "just
because he was looking another way at the time."

In the evening we got our guns into battery, erecting two small
batteries of twelves and sixes. A constant fire was kept up by the enemy
during the night, and blue lights were to be seen at intervals, as
though to inform us that they were on the watch. From the debauched
habits of the Mussulmans, in any situation in life, they seldom retire
to rest till very late; and then, indeed, so stupefied with eating and
smoking auffeem (opium), that they are incapable of being roused to any
active duty. From their constant use of this intoxicating drug, they are
dull companions when the spirit is absorbed and dead within them; but,
when revived, I know no set of people more talkative, communicative, and
jovial. Often have I listened with delight to an old Mussulman soldier's
relation of his campaigns and stories. We heard drums and music the
whole night, now and then accompanied by the inharmonious roar of their
guns. The guns used in India by the natives are of cast iron; but, from
their using ball beat out instead of cast, the guns labour and roar
dreadfully, and the rough surface of their balls tears the muzzles to
pieces.

When the morning bestrewed its bright rays abroad, we threw a little
further light upon the subject, by opening our breaching-battery with a
salvo, accompanied with such terrific cheering and shouting, as seemed
to startle the new-risen sun, which at that identical moment peeped from
behind its golden curtains to see what was the matter. The enemy, after
a moment's pause, were seen in a tremendous bustle, mustering their full
force; and their heads were so thick, that, had our shelling-battery
been ready, we might have made dreadful havoc among the motley group.
They shouted, yelled, screamed, groaned; small arms whistled, cannons,
roared; and, in an instant, the fort was enveloped in smoke. It was
altogether a most terrific scene. At this moment a soldier called out,
"Shipp, have you made your will?" I said "Yes; which is, that I will
lead you into that fort undaunted, for all their smoke and
rattle."--"Well done, Jack!" said one; "That's a hearty!" said another;
and many a joke followed; but, to confess the truth, I thought it no
joking matter, but wished most earnestly that I could say, with Macbeth,
"I have _done_ the deed." Notwithstanding this, I saw no cause for
fretting. Without parents, or ties of any other kind, I felt that I was
fully justified in acting

    "As if a man were author of himself,
    And knew no other kin."

My ambition was to signalize myself in the field of honour; and, if it
was to be my fate to fall, I consoled myself with the reflection, that I
could not die in a better cause than fighting for my king and country.
These were my real feelings; but the business that was going on during
the whole of this day, afforded me but little time for reflection.
Towards evening, however, we were relieved from the trenches, and
obtained some rest.

The next day I took another peep at the Pins, who were in immense
numbers in front of our piquets. My fingers itched to be among them, but
my last escape withheld me. It was truly tantalizing to see these
fellows chuckering their horses not more than a quarter of a mile from
our post; but what irritated us still more was, that these miscreants,
that evening, sent into our camp about twenty grass-cutters, belonging
to the 8th Dragoons, some with their right arms cut off at the
wrist-joint, and others with the loss of their noses and ears. These
poor creatures paid dearly for their disobedience of general orders,
which forbade any grass-cutter from going out alone; but, for the love
of plunder, they will at all times risk their lives. It will appear
scarcely credible to the general reader, when he is informed, that to
every fighting-man in an Indian army, there are at least ten
camp-followers. The majority of these live by plundering the adjacent
villages round the camp and on the march; robbing every hut and field
within ten miles round. There is no possibility of checking them, or
preventing these abuses. Amongst these fellows are thieves of every
description, and the most notorious are jugglers. They commence their
nocturnal pilferings in a state of nudity, oiling themselves all over to
prevent their being held if caught; they then creep on their hands and
feet like dogs, and frequently imitate them in barking and howling, as
well as most other animals, more particularly goats, sheep, and asses.
In the course of my narrative, I shall have occasion to mention several
instances of this nature that happened to myself.

On the following morning, I went again on duty in the trenches. We
retired into the wood before mentioned, which had a path of
communication with the trenches, though it was a considerable distance
from the grand breaching-battery. Our operations against the fort
continued active and resolute; but our balls made but little impression
upon the mud bastions and curtains. Many of them scarcely buried
themselves, and others rolled down into the underworks of the enemy, and
were kindly sent back to us. It is almost folly to attempt to effect a
practicable breach in a fort built of such materials. The crust you
knock off the face of a bastion or curtain, forms a great barrier to
your approach to a solid footing. Young engineers are too apt to judge,
from the appearance of the fallen mud, that the breach is practicable;
when, the first step the storming-party takes, they find they sink up to
their necks in light earth. A woful instance of this nature I shall have
to advert to more particularly in the course of my narrative; and, if
it prove a timely hint to the inexperienced, I shall be rewarded. Stone
forts are soon demolished; when undermined well at the bottom, the top
will soon follow, and they cannot easily be repaired; but mud forts defy
human power.

We this day erected howitzer and mortar-batteries; and, when they first
opened, they struck terror and consternation into the enemy, who fled in
every direction, to avoid those destructive engines; but, in a few
hours, they dug holes in the ramparts, which they got into whenever they
saw those unwelcome visitors on the wing; and, unless the shell happened
actually to fall on them, they escaped in this way. But our shelling in
those days was a mere bagatelle to what it is now. A shell in five
minutes was then enormous; now, twenty in one minute is by no means
extraordinary, and these twice as big as in the times of which I speak.

This day the enemy was pretty passive; no doubt, making places of
refuge. Our shells, if thrown further into the town, must have been most
destructive, for the population was evidently prodigious, from the
number of fighting men. The houses frequently appeared on fire, and
several small explosions took place daily; no doubt small magazines.
These little incidents generally created cheering by the besiegers, and
redoubled firing by the enemy. In the course of the day we saw the rajah
for the first time: he was on the shabroodge, or royal bastion, with his
suite, reconnoitring with a spy-glass. The officer commanding the
howitzer battery laid a shell for the shabroodge, which struck the very
top of it, and soon dislodged his highness and suite. In a moment not a
soul was to be seen. On this bastion was an enormous gun, about a
seventy-two-pounder, which before had been laid up in embryo, but which,
as a mark of revenge for our having disturbed his highness, was now got
ready. From its gigantic size they could not depress it sufficiently to
bear upon our batteries, or it must have torn them to pieces. At last
off it went; the report was like that of an earthquake, but the ball
went a good quarter of a mile over us. Several other shots were, in the
course of the day, fired from it, but the balls never came nearer. Our
soldiers, finding it did no harm, christened it _Civil Tom_; but, from
the enormous dust it kicked up, the enemy thought it did wonders for
some time; until, at last, finding out their mistake, they turned its
gigantic muzzle towards camp, and actually threw a ball close to the
flag opposite Lord Lake's tent, more than two miles from the fort. The
only real mischief Civil Tom ever did (which, by the by, was rather
uncivil) was killing a poor water-carrier's bullock, and carrying away
the poor man's right arm. This was more than a mile from camp.

The night passed away without anything of moment, we still keeping up a
regular and constant fire, to prevent the enemy from rebuilding what we
had had so much trouble in knocking down, and at times indulging them
with a few whistling shells to keep them awake.

We now began to grow impatient to see what was inside this boasting
fort, for we had pretty well seen what was outside. The breach soon
began to wear a stormable appearance, when we discovered that they had
thrown out two small guns for the purpose of a cross fire and cutting
off our storming party, and to annoy and rake our breaching-battery. For
removing this evil we threw out two six-pounders, and we had not fired
many shots and given them more than a dozen shrapnells, when a
tremendous explosion took place, which finally removed the annoyance.

In the evening I heard the engineer say to Captain Nelley, commanding
the breaching-battery, that he imagined we should, on the following
evening, put a stop to their vaunting. "The next evening!" I muttered to
myself. I was standing close to Captain Nelley, who turned round to me
and said, "Shipp, how do you like that information?" I replied, "I wish
it was this night, Sir." This I did wish most sincerely, for I felt
that, having once resolved to undertake the desperate service in which I
had volunteered, the sooner I was in action the better.

    "Between the acting of a dreadful thing,
    And the first motion, all the interim is
    Like a phantasma, or a hideous dream;
    The genius and the mortal instruments
    Are then in council; and the state of man,
    Like to a little kingdom, suffers then
    The nature of an insurrection."

I have heard some men say that they would as soon fight as eat their
breakfasts; and others, that they "dearly loved fighting." If this were
true, what bloodthirsty dogs they must be! But I should be almost
illiberal enough to suspect these boasters of not possessing even
ordinary courage. I will not, however, go so far as positively to assert
this, but will content myself by asking these terrific soldiers to
account to me why, some hours previously to storming a fort, or fighting
a battle, are men pensive, thoughtful, heavy, restless, weighed down
with apparent solicitude and care? Why do men, on these occasions, more
fervently beseech the divine protection and guidance, to save them in
the approaching conflict? Are not all these feelings the result of
reflection, and of man's regard for his dearest care--his life, which no
mortal will part with if he can avoid it? There are periods in war which
put man's courage to a severe test: if, for instance, as was my case, I
knew I was to lead a forlorn hope on the following evening, innumerable
ideas will rush in quick succession on the mind; such as, "For aught my
poor and narrow comprehension can tell, I may to-morrow be summoned
before my Maker?" "How have I spent the life he has been pleased to
preserve to this period? Can I meet that just tribunal?" A man, situated
as I have supposed, who did not, even amid the cannon's roar and the din
of war, experience anxieties approaching to what I have described, may,
by possibility, have the courage of a lion, but he cannot possess the
feelings of a man. In action man is quite another being: the softer
feelings of the roused heart are absorbed in the vortex of danger, and
the necessity for self-preservation, and give place to others more
adapted to the occasion. In these moments there is an indescribable
elation of spirits; the soul rises above its wonted serenity into a kind
of frenzied apathy to the scene before you--a heroism bordering on
ferocity; the nerves become tight and contracted; the eye full and open,
moving quickly in its socket, with almost maniac wildness: the head is
in constant motion; the nostril extended wide, and the mouth apparently
gasping. If an artist could truly delineate the features of a soldier in
the battle's heat, and compare them with the lineaments of the same man
in the peaceful calm of domestic life, they would be found to be two
different portraits; but a sketch of this kind is not within the power
of art, for in action the countenance varies with the battle: as the
battle brightens, so does the countenance; and, as it lowers, so the
countenance becomes gloomy. I have known some men drink enormous
quantities of spirituous liquors when going into action, to drive away
little intruding thoughts, and to create false spirits; but these are as
short-lived as the ephemera that struggles but a moment on the crystal
stream, then dies. If a man have not natural courage, he may rest
assured that liquor will deaden and destroy the little he may possess.

Our two companies were relieved for the night, for the purpose of
resting ourselves and preparing for the ensuing evening's attack. On
this occasion one of our poor fellows was killed by a shot from the
fort, and he was ordered to be immediately buried. When we were about to
leave the trenches we found him still lying there, when the sergeant was
called, and asked by his officer, why he had not been buried, according
to orders. The sergeant, an Irishman, answered, "Faith! your honour, he
has grown so mighty stiff since he went dead, that he would neither ride
nor walk; he threw himself off my back twice; but I am just after
ordering a fatigue-party to march him there, whether he will or not."

The same sergeant was chided a short time before for shooting an unarmed
man. His officer told him it was a cowardly act to shoot a poor fellow
without arms. "Arms! your honour, I beg your honour's pardon, he had
two; ay, faith, and fists at the end of them; and he was just after
going to be mighty saucy besides. Besides, your honour, did not a
spalpeen shoot at and hit me at Deig, without so much as bidding me the
time of the morning, or by your lave, or with your lave? Fait! they must
expect no palaveration or blarney from Dennis Gaffen." To relate the
anecdotes of this man would fill a volume; but, as the two little ones
mentioned may bear the reading, I will insert a few more in their proper
places.

I slept soundly, and early in the morning commenced cleaning and
new-flinting my musket, and pointing my bayonet, that it might find its
way through the thick cotton-stuffed coats of our enemies. All Mussulman
soldiers wear these coats during winter. The cotton is about two inches
thick, and the coats are worn rather loose, so that you can with
difficulty cut through them; and I am persuaded that many of them are
ball-proof, and that bayonets and spears are the only weapons against
them. In the course of the day I walked down to the batteries, to well
ascertain the road I had to take to the breaches. Our batteries
continued, with unabated exertions, to knock off the defences; and
everything, from appearances, seemed calculated to insure complete
success. My heart was all alive this day, and I wished for the sombre
garments of night. This was the 9th day of January, 1805. The greatest
secrecy was observed as to the storming party; no general orders were
issued, nor was there any stir or bustle till the hour appointed--nine
o'clock. Orders and arrangements were communicated to officers
commanding regiments and companies, and in the same private manner
conveyed to us. The gun fired as usual at eight o'clock. This was the
signal to move out. I kissed and took leave of my favourite pony, Apple,
and dog, Wolf, and I went to my post at the head of the column, with my
little band of heroes, twelve volunteers from the different corps of the
army. Reader, you may believe me when I assure you, that at this
critical juncture everything else was forgotten in the enthusiasm of the
moment, except the contemplation of the honourable post confided to me.
"What!" thought I, "I, a youth, at the head of an Indian army!" I began
to think it presumption, when so many more experienced soldiers filled
the ranks behind. I thought that every eye was upon me, and I did not
regret the pitchy darkness of the night, which hid my blushing
countenance. All was still as the grave, when I distinctly heard
somebody call, "Sergeant Shipp!" This was Lieutenant-Colonel Salkeld,
adjutant-general of the army, who brought with him a golundauze, who had
deserted from the fort, and who, for filthy lucre, was willing to betray
his countrymen. This man was handed over to me, he having undertaken to
lead me to the breach. If he attempted to deceive me, or to run from me,
I had positive orders to shoot him; consequently, I kept a sharp
look-out on him. We then, in solemn silence, marched down to the
trenches, and remained there about half an hour, when we marched to the
attack in open columns of sections, the two flank companies of the 22nd
leading, supported by the 75th and 76th European regiments, and other
native infantry. I took the precaution of tying a rope round the wrist
of my guide, that he might not escape; for, firing at him at that moment
would have alarmed the fort. Not a word was to be heard; but the
cannon's rattling drowned many a deep-drawn sigh, from many as brave a
heart.

I was well supported, having my own two companies behind me. Colonel
Maitland, of his majesty's 76th regiment, commanded this storming-party,
and brave little Major Archibald Campbell his corps. The former officer
came in front to me, and pointed out the road to glory; but, observing
the native whom I had in charge, he asked who he was; and, on being
informed, said, "We can find the way without him; let him go about his
business." I remonstrated, and repeated to him the instructions I had
received; but his answer was, "I don't care; if you don't obey my
orders, I will send you to the rear." I did obey, and on we moved to the
attack. Immediately behind me were pioneers, carrying gabions and
fascines to fill up any cavities we might meet with. The enemy did not
discover our approach till within fifty paces of the ditch, when a
tremendous cannonade and peals of musketry commenced: rockets were
flying in all directions; blue lights were hoisted; and the fort seemed
convulsed to its very foundation. Its ramparts seemed like some great
volcano vomiting tremendous volumes of fiery matter; the roaring of the
great guns shook the earth beneath our feet; their small arms seemed
like the rolling of ten thousand drums; and their war trumpets rent the
air asunder. Men were seen skipping along the lighted ramparts, as busy
as emmets collecting stores for the dreary days of winter. The scene was
awfully grand, and must have been sublimely beautiful to the distant
spectator.

We pushed on at speed, but were soon obliged to halt. A ditch, about
twenty yards wide, and four or five deep, branched off from the main
trench. This ditch formed a small island, on which were posted a strong
party of the enemy, with two guns. Their fire was well directed, and the
front of our column suffered severely. The fascines and gabions were
thrown in; but they were as a drop of water in the mighty deep: the fire
became hotter, and my little band of heroes plunged into the water,
followed by our two companies, and part of the 75th regiment. The middle
of the column broke off, and got too far down to the left; but we soon
cleared the little island. At this time Colonel Maitland and Major
Campbell joined me, with our brave officers of the two companies, and
many of the other corps. I proposed following the fugitives; but our
duty was to gain the breach, our orders being confined to that object.
We did gain it; but, imagine our surprise and consternation, when we
found a perpendicular curtain going down to the water's edge, and no
footing, except on pieces of trees and stones that had fallen from
above. This could not bear more than three men a-breast, and if they
slipped--which many did--a watery grave awaited them, for the water was
extremely deep here. Close on our right was a large bastion, which the
enemy had judiciously hung with dead underwood. This was fired, and it
threw such a light upon the breach, that it was as clear as noonday.
They soon got guns to bear on us, and the first shot (which was grape)
shot Colonel Maitland dead, wounded Major Campbell in the hip or leg, me
in the right shoulder, and completely cleared the remaining few of my
little party. We had at that moment reached the top of the breach, not
more, as I before stated, than three a-breast, when we found that the
enemy had completely repaired that, by driving in large pieces of wood,
stakes, stones, bushes, and pointed bamboos, through the crevices of
which was a mass of spears jobbing diagonally, which seemed to move by
mechanism. Such was the footing we had, that it was utterly impossible
to approach these formidable weapons; meantime, small spears or darts
were hurled at us; and stones, lumps of wood, stink-pots, and bundles of
lighted straw, thrown upon us. In the midst of this tumult, I got one of
my legs through a hole, so that I could see into the interior of the
fort. The people were like a swarm of bees. In a moment I felt something
seize my foot; I pulled with all my might, and at last succeeded in
disengaging my leg, but leaving my boot behind me. Our establishing
ourselves on this breach in sufficient force to dislodge this mass of
spearsmen, was physically impossible. Our poor fellows were mowed down
like corn-fields, without the slightest hope of success. The rear of the
column suffered much, as they were within range of the enemy's shot. A
retreat was ordered, and we were again obliged to take to the water; and
many a poor wounded soldier lost his life in this attempt. Not one of
our officers escaped without being wounded, and Lieutenant Creswell was
almost cut to pieces. We, as may be supposed, returned almost
broken-hearted at this our first failure in India. Our loss was a
melancholy one; and the conviction that the poor wounded fellows we were
compelled to leave behind would be barbarously massacred, incited our
brave boys to beg a second attempt. This was denied: had it been
granted, it must infallibly have proved abortive; for there was,
literally, no breach. The disastrous issue of our attack caused the
enemy to exult exceedingly; and the shouting and roaring that followed
our retreat, were daggers in the souls of our wounded and disappointed
soldiers, who were with difficulty restrained from again rushing to the
breach. I found that I had received a spear-wound in the right finger,
and several little scratches from the combustibles they fired at us.
Pieces of copper coin, as well as of iron, stone, and glass, were
extracted from the wounds of those who were fortunate enough to escape.
We were, in the course of the night, relieved, and went to our lines to
brood over our misfortunes.

I found, the next morning, to add to my feelings of distress, that the
old wound in my head had opened afresh; the wound on my shoulder, having
injured the bone, was also extremely painful; but that on my finger,
being a flesh-wound, did not trouble me much. The general orders of the
day following were highly flattering to us all, placing the blame, if
any, where it ought to be. Our engineer, finding the spot we had
attempted strong and impracticable, changed his position more to the
eastward, where the difficulties were not so formidable. During these
new operations, our breaching-guns, four in number, were sent to the
park to be re-bushed, their bushes having been injured from the constant
firing and heat.

Thus ended our first attempt to take the strong fortress of Bhurtpore by
storm.

[Illustration]

FOOTNOTES:

[9] Runjeet Singh, rajah of Bhurtpore, in Rajpootana--not the famous
Sikh adventurer and ruler of the same name--had concluded a treaty with
the British in 1803, and a contingent of his cavalry fought bravely
under Lake, at the battle of Laswarree against the Mahrattas. But, on
the approach of Holkar, Runjeet Singh wanted to evade his engagements
with the British, whereupon Lake attacked and captured Deig and laid
siege to Bhurtpore. The total loss in Lake's army at Bhurtpore is given
by the historian Mill as 388 killed and 1,894 wounded. The causes of
failure were, undoubtedly, those suggested by Shipp, p. 125. When
disputes as to the Bhurtpore succession led the British to attack the
fortress again in 1825, Lord Combermere had 25,000 men, and a strong
battering-train, but had to resort to mining to render the breaches
practicable.--ED.




CHAPTER VIII.


Having abundance of spare time while preparations were making for a
second attack on the fort, Lord Lake determined to disturb Holkar in his
hiding-place; for which purpose a party of infantry was dispatched with
about four six-pounders. We soon came within sight of him, sheltered a
good deal from his view by high trees and jungle. The fort, observing
our manoeuvres, commenced a heavy cannonade. Holkar, alarmed, got on the
move and made towards Futtypore Seccrah, one of his old haunts. Once
from under the walls of the fort, our cavalry soon put his troops to
flight; immense numbers were killed, and elephants, horses, camels,
spears, matchlocks, colours, &c., were brought into camp. Holkar's best
elephant was that day taken, and some little treasure was found on
camels. Notwithstanding this routing, however, they took up their old
ground, and we returned to camp, with some few men killed and wounded.
This skirmish, instead of decreasing their impudence, seemed only to
increase it; for they were day and night hovering round our piquets, the
object of which was to take our attention from their main body, who had
been dispatched to intercept a small detachment that was on the way to
join us, from Muttra. Our spies soon brought intelligence of this, and,
in little more than ten minutes after, three regiments of dragoons were
on the move to rescue them, and arrived just in time to save our stores
and the lives of the little party. Holkar commanded in person on this
occasion; and it was reported that he was killed, though this proved
afterwards to be false. A reward was offered for his head, and a great
number were tendered, but none belonged to one-eyed Holkar. It is true,
heads were produced without an eye, but the phiz of that notorious Pin
was too well known to Chiggram (our best spy) to admit of our being
imposed on.

My wounds at this time were nearly well; and, having been unsuccessful
in the first forlorn hope which I led, I volunteered to lead the second.
One night, previous to the time appointed for the second attack, I
sauntered to a retired spot, far from the observation of my comrades, to
muse over the prospect then immediately before me, and to ask His aid
who alone has the power to protect us. Scarcely had I entered a wood
about one hundred yards from the trenches, when my attention was
arrested by a soldier on his knees, fervently supplicating the aid of
Almighty God in the coming storm. The moment he heard my footstep, he
suddenly arose, and, seeming ashamed of the way in which he was engaged,
he said, "Who's that?" I answered, "Sergeant Shipp; who are you?" He
replied, "Private Murphy."--"Murphy!" I repeated; "is it possible that
such a blasphemer as you, who, day after day, and hour after hour, boast
your own infamy in a wanton disbelief and contempt of every quality that
can constitute the man and the Christian, and who, no later than
yesternight, solemnly protested before your comrades, that you firmly
believed there was no place of punishment save a man's own conscience,
and that hell was merely a name to frighten and intimidate
schoolboys--can it be possible," continued I, "that you have at this
late hour retired to this lonely place, and are found in the act of
prayer?"--"Shipp," he replied, in a softer tone, and in nearly the
following words, "whatever men may boast or say in their deluded and
more irrational moments, there is a period when all those blasphemous
expressions rush across the human mind, and the recollection of having
uttered them leaves an inconceivable pressure on the humbled heart; but
I pray you, do not expose me to my comrades, or I shall become their
jeer and ridicule. I beg this as a favour."--"What!" said I, "more
afraid of the derision of men, than the wrath of an offended God?"--"No,
no," replied he; "but you know how religious soldiers are held in
derision by some of our comrades."--"Well," I said, "I shall keep your
secret, and you may confidently trust me on this subject; I will promise
you most solemnly that I will never join in the laugh against you, and,
if you have not finished, I shall be gratified in joining you in prayer,
as I have rebuked you for your profligacy." He affectionately seized my
hand, and pulled me toward the earth.

On the following day this poor fellow was summoned to his last account;
and who knows but this single act of faith and devotion might have saved
his immortal soul?

Two o'clock in the afternoon of the 20th of January, 1805, was arranged
for the second storming of Bhurtpore. To prevent any obstruction by the
trench, which was supposed to be at this part deep and wide, a bridge of
bamboos was made, that would admit of three file a-breast. This bridge
could be thrown a considerable distance by a hundred men, and was
supported by ghee dubbahs (skins) in which the natives keep oil and
butter for exportation; which, when dried, are light, and will bear a
considerable weight before you can sink them. Elephants and camels were
also laden with tents, and hackeries, or carts drawn by bullocks, with
bales of cotton, all to fill up the ditch, to enable us to cross to the
breach.

I once more took my station with my twelve volunteers, supported by my
two companies as before. A shell from one of the howitzers was a signal
to move. On this signal being given, the shell, bursting in the muzzle
of the gun or mortar, killed two of our grenadiers--a sad beginning. The
bridge followed the forlorn hope, carried on men's shoulders, and must
have appeared some extraordinary monster to those who were not
acquainted with its intended use. We moved on; and, before I got half
way down to the fort, six of my men were killed or wounded. The enemy,
no doubt encouraged by our late defeat, had redoubled their fire, both
in guns and men; and on the right side of the breach they had thrown out
an underwork, which was filled with matchlock-men, and in which they had
several guns. My men kept falling off one by one; and when I arrived at
the edge of the ditch, which appeared wide and deep, and was assisting
the men with the bridge, I received a matchlock ball, which entered over
the right eye, and passed out over the left. This tumbled me, my
forehead literally hanging over my nose, and the wound bleeding
profusely. I was at this time close to our gallant Captain Lindsay, who,
at the same moment, received a ginjall ball[10] in the right knee, which
shattered the bone to pieces. I recovered a little from the stun of my
wound, when, the first thing that met my eye--for I could only see with
one--was the bamboo bridge quietly gliding down the stream, being some
yards too short. Nothing but killed and wounded could be seen, and there
was not the most distant chance of getting in. To have attempted
crossing the ditch would have been an act of madness. In descending we
must have plunged over our heads in water; and they had two small guns
bearing on the spot. At last a retreat was ordered. Previous to this,
our poor fellows stood like sheep to be shot at, without the remotest
hope of success. The camels and elephants, alarmed by the tremendous
firing and shouting, could not be induced to approach the fort, many of
them throwing their loads and running back to camp, and wild into the
woods. Seven hundred men were killed and wounded on this occasion. Our
brave Captain Lindsay's wound was so bad that his leg was amputated in
the battery. My wound was a dangerous one, having touched the bone. I
was immediately sent home to camp, where I lay completely blind for
several days. This, added to our disastrous defeat, threw me into a
fever, and nearly cost me my life; but, with the aid of a kind
Providence, and the advantage of a strong and unimpaired constitution, I
soon recovered.

Our engineer now gave up this side of the fort as perfectly hopeless,
and we went more to the eastward, breaching a prominent bastion; but the
whole fort was so constructed that one part protected the others; and
therefore, wherever we breached we were sure of a destructive
cross-fire. From our melancholy failures, our poor fellows became
disheartened; scarcely a man had escaped without being wounded, and the
sad recollection of their poor comrades that were left behind in a
mutilated state, was the constant topic of conversation. Our
mortification was greatly increased by seeing our men's clothing paraded
on the ramparts, and worn by the miscreants in the fort. However, we
still lived in the fond hope that our next effort would prove more
successful.

I could again go abroad, although my wound was by no means healed. It
was now truly distressing to enter our men's tents, where, but a month
before, the merry joke went round, and mirth and hilarity prevailed.
Naught but gloomy faces, and even them but few, were to be seen: some
had lost brothers; others, dear comrades; Captain Lindsay had lost his
leg; Lieutenant Creswell had been cut to pieces; and every other officer
was wounded. Our loss in killed and wounded in the two assaults, in our
two companies alone, was nearly the one half of the total number.

After the storm, our breaching-guns were again sent to the park to be
re-bushed. This was a seasonable pause to enable us to recruit our
shattered frames and spirits; but it also gave the enemy an opportunity
of repairing and reinforcing every point of attack.

On the 18th of February things began to wear a more enlivening
appearance. The breached bastion seemed to bow its haughty head to our
roaring guns, and the 20th was talked of as the day for storming it. Our
last disastrous repulse was scarcely eradicated from our minds; the
massacre of our brave comrades was still alive in our memories; but the
fond hope of retaliation--I do not mean in cutting up a poor defenceless
creature, not a single instance of which can, in the long course of our
wars, be brought against the Company's army--spirited us up, and we
looked forward to the time when we might drag the garments of our
murdered comrades from the backs of the vaunting foe. They were now
daily and hourly exhibiting to our view the number of muskets they had
taken; our ammunition which had fallen into their hands was now turned
against ourselves; as also our cannon-shot, which they had picked out of
the two old breaches. We again possessed our wonted spirits and
cheerfulness, and made preparation to retrieve the British character.
The patient conduct and intrepid gallantry of our officers and soldiers
when in the hour of their utmost distress, from repeated defeats, did
not pass unnoticed by the enemy; and it is not improbable that the
resolution and heroism then displayed by the troops were the means of
facilitating that long friendship which afterwards subsisted between the
rajah of Bhurtpore and the Company.

The day appointed (20th of February) arrived, and was ushered in with a
new and unexpected scene. About four hundred men from the fort,
emboldened, no doubt, by our tardiness, and the repeated defeats which
our troops had experienced, rushed out upon us just as we were relieving
trenches, and actually reached and had possession of our batteries and
trenches before we could return. Every one of these men was in a state
of intoxication, and fought desperately; but we soon drove them from the
batteries; then, turning our guns against them, dreadful was the
carnage. The fort fired indiscriminately at the whole party. These
fellows were, no doubt, a set of vagabonds they wished to get rid of;
and, if this was the case, their wish was fully realized, for a very
few returned to tell the tale. This was the kind of retaliation we
sighed for; but we lost a considerable number of men, killed and
wounded, in this affray; but these they had not the barbarous
gratification of cutting up. Their wounded men left within our reach
were sent to the native hospitals, and every comfort administered to
them. They were in the same wards with our wounded men, where friendship
presided instead of murder. Had the war been between native and native,
the cruelties would have been equal on both sides.

When this strange rencounter had subsided, the storming party was
ordered for twelve o'clock. Reader, imagine my disappointment when my
doctor most positively forbade my being employed on this occasion, as my
wound in the forehead was still in such a state that, should I get
heated or catch cold, he feared an inflammation of the brain would take
place. I could have thrown what few brains I had in his face; but I was
obliged to obey. The forlorn hope was led by Lieutenant Templer, of the
76th regiment, as brave a little fellow as ever wore a red coat. I
looked on at a short distance from the scene of action, and a desperate
hard struggle it was. No sooner did our brave boys gain the top of the
breach, than the well-directed fire from the fort swept them off.
Footing they had none; they literally hung on the bosom of the bastion.
A third retreat was the result; leaving behind them upwards of five
hundred dead and wounded: indeed, they might all be said to be dead, for
death was inevitable. The enemy again manned the breach in swarms,
shouting victory! It would have been better for me had I been there, for
I am sure I fought and struggled as hard as any one engaged. I cannot
describe my feelings and those of the other spectators of this dreadful
scene; but what can eight or ten men a-breast do against a legion,
posted aloft, and protected by walls, bastions, &c., and where every
possible engine is in requisition for their destruction? Thus exposed,
there was never any real chance of success. The whole circumference of
the bastion, if lined with men, would not have contained more than
fifteen or twenty men a-breast; and the whole means of the fort were
levelled on this small space, to their certain defeat and destruction.
All that was in the power of mortal man to do was done, but all our
efforts were in vain.

The storming party was again ordered for the following day. I suffered
an excruciating headache, but said nothing of the badness of my wound,
which at that time bore a most frightful appearance, resolved to die
rather than give up my past honour. I assured my doctors that I was
well, and felt quite adequate to take my station, and entreated that
they would not stand between me and glory. At last they consented, and I
made the most of the short period between that and the storm, in
supplicating the Divine protection, and in penning a letter to my only
relation, on account of arranging my little affairs. I had made up my
mind that I could not, in all human probability, escape a third time;
but He alone who created life can destroy it. In the evening I left my
tent, to seek in solitude that consolation for my troubled bosom which
the drunken and tumultuous riot of a camp could but ill afford. The
captain of our company, under whose care I had been brought up, was one
of the best and most pious of men. In gratitude I mention the name of
Captain Effingham Lindsay, now colonel on the half-pay of the 22nd
regiment of Foot. To this beloved individual I am indebted for having
implanted in my bosom, in early youth, those religious principles and
feelings by which I have ever since endeavoured to direct my conduct,
and from which, in the hour of affliction and of peril, I have ever
derived inexpressible comfort. It was with the view of gaining
consolation and support from private meditation and prayer, that I now
retired from the riotous company of my companions in arms, the evening
previous to my leading, for the third time, the forlorn hope at
Bhurtpore. Scarcely had I gone beyond the discordant sound of revelry,
and begun to muse upon the subjects that were ever uppermost in my
mind, viz., the possibility of my ever returning to my native village,
or ever seeing my poor father, when an object presented itself to my
sight, that for a moment startled, and, I must confess, a little alarmed
me. The moon was just peeping from behind the high towers of the fort,
and shedding her bright rays through the tree near which I stood, when
by her light I perceived that the object which arrested my attention was
a European soldier, prostrated on the ground--as I supposed, dead. I
approached him, but could not hear him breathe. I laid my hand on his
cheek; it was cold and chilly; which confirmed me in my first opinion,
that he was dead. At last, I ventured to grasp his icy hand, which
roused him, and he rose up and said, "Why did you disturb me? I have had
a sweet sleep." Then, looking at and suddenly recognizing me, he said,
"Is that you, Shipp?" I replied, "Yes; what brought you to this dreary
spot?" He replied, "The same, in all probability, that guided you here."
"What," said I, "do you suppose that to be?" He replied, "To reflect on
the scene before us to-morrow. Yes, sergeant," he continued, "I have
this night stolen like a thief from the riotous parties I have too long
joined, to spend an hour or two alone; and, if I must confess it, in
prayer. Having offered up my prayers, I felt my poor heart relieved of a
burden I cannot describe, and thus I fell asleep, and am now glad to
meet a friend in this lonely spot." We then, together, made the earth
our communion-table, and offered up our poor but fervent devotions to
the throne of mercy. It was the will of the Almighty to call my
companion in prayer the next day from the world, and to spare me, but
with a wound in the head, to show my dependence upon His mercy.

Two o'clock in the afternoon of the next day was ordered for the
assault. I forgot my aches and wounds, and was at my old post.
Lieutenant Templer, of his majesty's 76th regiment (he was a little man,
but he possessed the heart of a lion) accompanied me on this occasion,
with a small union jack, to plant on the enemy's bastion. He gave me his
hand, and smilingly said, "Shipp, I am come to rob you of part of your
glory; you are a regular monopolist of that commodity." He continued, "I
will place Old England's banner on their haughty bastion, or die in the
attempt!" He fell a victim to his zeal, having first planted his colour
on the bastion.

On the way down from the camp, we met his excellency the
commander-in-chief, and suite. His lordship addressed me and my forlorn
hope: "Sergeant, it is with sincere regret I again see you wounded, and
again at the head of your little band of heroes. I will not check your
praiseworthy spirit; go into glory, my lads, and may Heaven prosper your
zeal, and crown you with triumph!" His lordship addressed every corps
that passed him; but when the remnant of the two companies of the 22nd
regiment marched by, he was seen to turn from them, and the tear fell
down his cheek; but, fearful it might be observed, he took off his hat
and cheered them. This was not the tear of Judas, for his lordship often
shed tears of sorrow for our great loss at this place. He was a true
soldier's friend, and valued their lives as much as he did his own.

The storming party marched out in the usual steady order; yet, from our
recent calamitous defeats, there was not that spirit amongst the men
which I had witnessed on former occasions. We had already experienced
three disastrous repulses from this fort, and there now seemed a cloud
on every brow, which proceeded, I have no hesitation, in asserting, from
a well-grounded apprehension that this, our fourth assault, would be
concluded by another retreat. If any sight could be exhibited to the
human eye that was calculated to work upon the feelings of men already
disappointed and dispirited, it was the scene that was exposed to our
view on approaching to this breach; for there lay our poor comrades who
had fallen in previous attempts, many of them in a state of nudity,
some without heads, some without arms or legs, and others whose bodies
exhibited the most barbarous cruelties, for they were literally cut to
pieces. The sight was truly awful and appalling, and the eye of pity
closed instinctively on such a spectacle of woe. Those who attempted to
extend the hand of relief were added to the number of the slain, as the
spot was much exposed to a cross-fire from the fort. Could any sight be
more distressing for affectionate comrades to look on? I say
affectionate, for, among men living together in one barrack, and,
perhaps under one tent, in familiar intercourse, there must be a greater
regard for each other than is found to subsist among those who meet
casually, once a day or once a week. In a soldier's barrack, the
peculiarities, good or bad, of every individual are known; added to
which, arduous services will always link men together in the bond of
union and affection. Many of these mutilated objects still breathed, and
could be seen to heave the agonized bosom; some raised their heads
clotted with blood; others their legs and arms; and, in this manner,
either made signs to us or faintly cried for help and pity. It was a
sight to turn nature's current, and to melt a heart of stone. Such was
its effect upon our lines, that, after a short conflict of the softer
feelings, the eye of every man flashed the vivid spark of vengeance
against the cruel race who had committed such wanton barbarities; and,
if mortal effort could have surmounted the obstacles in our path, those
who witnessed the horrid scene I have just described must infallibly
have succeeded. But the effort was beyond mortal power. Braver hearts,
or more loyal, never left the isle of Albion, than those who fell like
withered leaves, and found a soldier's grave at Bhurtpore.

Our ascent was found, for the fourth time, to be quite impossible: every
man who showed himself was sure of death. The soldiers in the fort were
in chain armour. I speak this from positive conviction, for I myself
fired at one man three times in the bastion, who was not six yards from
me, and he did not even bob his head. We were told afterwards, that
every man defending the breach was in full armour, which was a coat,
breast-plate, shoulder-plates, and armlets, with a helmet and chain
face-guard; so that our shots could avail but little. I had not been on
the breach more than five minutes, when I was struck with a large shot
on my back, thrown down from the top of the bastion, which made me lose
my footing, and I was rolling down sideways, when I was brought up by a
bayonet of one of our grenadiers passing through the shoe, into the
fleshy part of the foot, and under the great toe. My fall carried
everything down that was under me. The man who assisted me in getting
up, was at that moment shot dead: his name was Courtenay, of the 22nd
light company. I regained my place in time enough to see poor Lieutenant
Templer, who had planted the colour on the top, cut to pieces, by one of
the enemy rushing out, and cutting him almost in two, as he lay flat
upon his face on the top of the breach. The man was immediately shot
dead, and trotted to the bottom of the ditch. I had not been in my new
place long, when a stink-pot, or other earthen pot, containing
combustible matter, fell on my pouch, in which were about fifty rounds
of ball cartridges. The whole exploded; my pouch I never saw more, and I
was precipitated from the top to the bottom of the bastion. How I got
there in safety, I know not; but, when I came to myself, I found I was
lying under the breach, with my legs in the water. I was much hurt from
the fall, my face was severely scorched, my clothes much burnt, and all
the hair on the back of my head burnt off. I for a time could not tell
where I was. I crawled to the opposite side of the bank, and seated
myself by a soldier of the same company, who did not know me. I sat
here, quite unable to move, for some little time, till a cannon-ball
struck in the ditch, which knocked the mud all over me. This added
greatly to the elegance of my appearance; and in this state I contrived,
somehow or other, to crawl out of the ditch. At this moment the retreat
was sounded, after every mortal effort had been made in vain.

The case was now deemed completely hopeless, and we were obliged to give
up the contest, having lost, in killed and wounded, upwards of three
thousand men--braver, or more zealous, never lived--against this fort.
Of the twelve gallant fellows who composed the third forlorn hope led by
me, not one returned to reap the proffered reward of the
commander-in-chief: add to this, the loss of one of the best officers in
our army, Captain Menzies, of the 22nd grenadier company, aid-de-camp to
Lord Lake. He fell endeavouring to rally some native troops that were
exposed to a galling fire, and began to give way. In this heroic attempt
he lost his life, regretted by the whole army. Of our two companies,
scarce a soul escaped uninjured. Near the breach, the dead, dying, and
wounded would have melted the heart of the most callous wretch; and, had
not the little party who stormed the eleven-gun battery proved
successful, few, if any, would have escaped the dreadful carnage. You
must permit me to draw the gloomy shroud of mourning over this scene of
misery and terror. The sad details of this siege have years ago been
before the public; and here my personal services at Bhurtpore ended,
leaving impressions, both on mind and body, that can never be
obliterated.

In the course of the siege, frequent overtures were made from the fort,
but of what nature I do not pretend to know. They were at last, however,
obliged to come to our terms, which compelled them to pay all the
expenses of the siege, &c.; after which we raised the siege, and
returned to camp. The loss of the enemy must have been immense: report
said, five thousand men, women, and children; and, from the immense
concourse of inhabitants in the town, with their families, that number
does not appear to be at all improbable. Certain it is, that they must
have been as heartily tired of it as we were.

Our sad failures, on the occasion of this memorable siege, may
unquestionably, in my opinion, fairly be attributed to our total want of
means. What were four breaching-guns against such a fort as that of
Bhurtpore? Forty would not have been too many: as a proof of which, if
we contrast the means of attack at our disposal, with those possessed by
Lord Combermere, in his successful siege of the same fort, it will be
found, that the number of guns employed on the latter occasion, compared
with the former, was at least ten to one. With the original force of
Bhurtpore--calculated at not less than a hundred thousand men--it was
scarcely possible that, with a less number of guns, the place could be
taken by assault. It should be recollected, also, that, with the means
we had, the ditch which surrounds the fort made it quite inaccessible to
us. Sapping and mining, the only way by which Bhurtpore could have
fallen, was, at the period of the first siege of that place, scarcely
known in India; and shelling was then only in its infancy. The former of
these methods was resorted to by the present commander-in-chief, with
great success; and the latter, from the improvements which, since 1805,
have been made in this destructive system of warfare, with at least ten
times the vigour and effect that it was possible for us to impart to it.

After our last failure, conciliatory orders were published to our
disheartened troops; everything was done to console and comfort them;
and, with these judicious measures, though the men could scarcely bear
the stigma of being defeated, yet, after a few days' reflection, their
features began to brighten up, and they began to weigh things in a
proper light; when an unexpected and untoward event happened, that was
likely to have been attended with the most frightful consequences. The
peace having been ratified, the garrison had permission to visit our
camp. Imagine our mortification and surprise, when many of them had the
presumption to appear, under our very noses, with the coats, sashes, and
arms they had torn from the dead bodies of our poor comrades. This news
flew through the camp in a moment; the whole army was out; every eye
flashed vengeance: but, by the timely interference of the
commander-in-chief, and the officers in general, the men were calmed,
and the mischief stopped. In the next general orders my name appeared as
Ensign in his majesty's 65th regiment, with many flattering encomiums by
the commander-in-chief. From the whole of this regiment, during the
short time I remained with them, I received the most marked attentions;
and whenever I served with, or met them afterwards, I experienced from
them the most disinterested friendship.

On the day of my appointment, I was metamorphosed into a gentleman; hair
cut and curled; new coat, &c., &c.; had an invitation to dine with the
commander-in-chief; but, of course, kept myself in the background. The
gentleman did not seem to sit easy on me; for, you must know, I was then
a blushing modest youth: but the extremely kind inquiries of his
lordship, and of his equally kind son, if I was there, tended greatly to
dissipate my shyness. His lordship, on hearing I had arrived, approached
me with extended hand, and shook mine cordially, saying, "I congratulate
you as a brave young fellow, and I shall not lose sight of your merit."
He requested I would sit next to him at dinner. I did so; and, after the
cloth was removed, he made me fight the forlorn hopes over again; at the
recital of which his lordship was much affected. The next day his
lordship again sent for me, when he addressed me in these words, "Shipp,
I have been thinking a good deal about your case. You, of course, have
not much money. I know your generous Lindsay will do anything to serve
you, but he must really leave a little for me to do. You may therefore
draw on me, through the field paymaster, for what you want." His
lordship afterwards sent me a tent, two camels, and a horse, as
presents. The rest of my fitting-out my excellent friend, Captain
Lindsay, generously gave me.

Lord Lake was truly my friend, as he was that of every soldier in the
army. He was munificent in his charities, being ever the first in
subscribing large sums to whatever cases of distress appeared. I will
relate one instance of his benevolence and generosity. A very old
lieutenant could not purchase a company then vacant; indeed, knowing he
could not purchase, he had thought nothing of the vacancy. In the
evening I was standing with this officer, when the orderly-book,
publishing his promotion by purchase, was put into his hands. He said,
"There must be some mistake, for he had not a rupee he could call his
own." At that moment Colonel Lake, his lordship's son, came up, and
wished him joy of his promotion. The other said, "Colonel, there must be
some mistake in this; I cannot purchase." Colonel Lake said, "My father
knows you cannot, and has therefore lent you the money, which he never
intends to take back." These were the sort of acts in which his lordship
delighted; and, in consequence, he was loved by his army, and admired by
the people wherever he came.

In about three weeks after, having been appointed ensign in the 65th
regiment, his lordship promoted me to the rank of lieutenant in his
Majesty's 76th regiment, thus faithfully keeping his promise of not
losing an opportunity of serving me. In this regiment I became a great
favourite with my colonel, the Honourable William Monson, then
brigadier-general of the army.

One of the articles of treaty was, that Holkar should be driven from
under the walls of the fort of Bhurtpore. This had been done; but he
still hovered about camp, annoying our foraging-parties and small
escorts coming into camp with supplies. A few days after having joined
the 76th regiment, I was appointed an extra aid-de-camp to the
brigadier, to proceed on a foraging-party, consisting of one regiment of
native cavalry and four six-pounders, with five hundred of irregular or
local horse. We had not proceeded many miles from camp, when we saw
Holkar's troops in immense force, posted on an eminence. They showed
symptoms of fight. We collected our elephants, camels, and bullocks,
and left them in charge of the five hundred irregular horse; then,
placing two of the six-pounders behind the regiment of native cavalry,
we moved slowly on till within two or three hundred yards of the enemy,
when we gave them about twenty rounds of grape, killing great numbers.
We then charged them, and cut up a great number more. I had a narrow
escape; my horse was killed by a spear-wound in the chest, which entered
his heart, and I fell under him. The horseman was about to give me a few
inches of the same spear, when the honourable brigadier cut him down,
and thus I escaped, taking the liberty of riding my well-meaning
adversary's horse to camp. I was a good deal hurt by the fall, but this,
with one or two men wounded, and some few horses killed, were the only
casualties of the day.

Holkar, finding that our hands were so unoccupied that we had more
leisure than suited his purposes, made towards Jeypore. We crossed the
river Chumlah, near Daulpore, in pursuit; but he retired to his old
haunts, with his colleague Ameer-Khan, and we to quarters in Futtypore
Seccrah.

The following year, everything wearing the pacific garb, and the gallant
regiment to which I belonged being literally cut to pieces--so much so,
that we had scarcely a sound man left in the regiment--it was considered
to be time that the corps had some cessation from war. Twenty-five years
had they been in India, and stood the brunt of all Lord Lake's
conquests, and those on the coast. When I was in the regiment (1805) I
believe there were only two men of the original corps--Lieutenant
Montgomery, and Quarter-Master Hopkins.

The regiment now embarked for Calcutta. I preceded them in charge of
invalids. Many of these poor fellows were without arms and legs; and
some of them so dreadfully cut up, that scarcely a human feature could
be traced. Many died from their wounds. Mine, by the blessing of Divine
Providence, continued to do well; but I was visited with the most
excruciating headaches and dizziness from the wound in my head; and the
terrific spectacle of the last scene at Bhurtpore so affected my mind,
that scarcely a night passed in which I did not dream of "hair-breadth
'scapes i' th' imminent deadly breach," and fancy I was fighting my
battles over again. My head was so much injured, that the report of a
gun would startle me dreadfully; but, with an excellent constitution,
care, and avoiding drink, I soon recovered, though the wound across my
forehead has considerably impaired my sight. Twelve pieces, or splints,
came away from the upper part of the wound; and when you put your finger
upon it, the skull was so thin that you could feel the pulsation, like
the pendulum of a clock. My wounds are still a certain and sure
weather-glass. That on my forehead will, to this day, swell and expand
on any change of the weather, or variation in the atmosphere.

[Illustration]

[Illustration]

FOOTNOTES:

[10] This is a long matchlock, which moves on a pivot, and carries about
a two-pound ball.




CHAPTER IX.


You have now, reader, followed me through my military enterprises, up to
the time of my being appointed lieutenant in the 76th regiment. The time
has arrived when I have to request that you will beat the silvery wave
with me; for I am bound to my native country with my regiment, after an
absence of ten years. On arriving at Calcutta, our reception was
gratifying in the extreme. Every house opened its hospitable doors, and
the tables groaned under a profusion of good cheer. Every one was
anxious to hear the tale of war; and, wherever I went, I was thought
ill-natured if I refused to repeat storm after storm, and all my battles
over and over again. But, the ship being about to weigh anchor, our stay
here was but short. We embarked at Balloh Ghaut, on board small sloops,
and in three days reached the vessel, the _Lord Duncan_, Captain
Bradford, in safety. We had on board a great number of passengers, and
about two hundred invalids, under the command of Captain Lindsay, of my
old corps. Two days afterwards we bade adieu to the Indian shores,
leaving many dear and respected friends behind us.

We were at this time at war with France, and the Indian Seas were well
watched by cruisers from off the Isle of France. Our fleet consisted of
thirteen Indiamen of the first-rate convoyed by the _Tremendous_,
seventy-four, and _Hindostan_, seventy-four. We sailed in two lines,
headed by the two seventy-fours. All seemed order and discipline, and
we thought ourselves a match for any ships of France we might have
fallen in with. Everything went on smoothly, practising and drilling our
guns once a week, and keeping a constant look-out for the enemy. Off the
coast of Madagascar a ship was discovered, early in the morning,
standing right down upon us. Seeing her a single vessel, we conceived
her to be one of our cruisers from off the Cape of Good Hope; but, when
she was within one mile and a half from us, she could not answer our
signals, and consequently ran towards the land, which was to windward of
us. The _Tremendous_, being a fast sailer, went in chase of her. The
Frenchman soon found that he was mistaken. He, no doubt, at first took
us for a French fleet that was then out in these seas, and relied upon
his fast and superior sailing to enable him to get away, should he prove
mistaken; but our commodore overhauled him hand over hand. The Frenchman
tacked, turned, and twisted, but he found it was of no use. He therefore
resorted to his natural cunning, shortened sail, and at last backed
maintopsail, and waited till the English vessel came within pistol-shot.
The commodore, conceiving that the Frenchman was about to strike, did
not wish to injure her, and therefore would not fire. The French captain
availed himself of this interval, and gave the _Tremendous_ a whole
broadside, by which she was so disabled as to become an immoveable log
on the water. The Frenchman up-helm, and off he started. The commodore,
at last, got his ship's broadside to bear, and nearly tore her out of
the water. However, she was a faster sailer than any ship in our fleet,
and, finally, made her escape, to the mortification of the whole fleet,
except one Captain Brusée, a French prisoner of war, a passenger on
board our ship, who danced with ineffable delight;--natural enough, but
not very pleasant to the sight of an Englishman.

The following day we experienced a most violent hurricane, which lasted
for two days without cessation. Fortunately, our fleet suffered but
little injury, with the exception of one vessel, the _Lady
Castlereagh_, which we thought must inevitably have been lost. She was
about a quarter of a mile from us, and we could at one time see her
whole keel. There was a general shriek of terror from all on board of
us, and our captain said that he feared she would never right. The next
gigantic wave, however, brought her up, and she did right, in spite of
our predictions, but seemed to roll, pitch, and labour dreadfully. Some
parts of her masts were carried away; but what, I do not now recollect.
Three of our ships separated from the fleet, and we imagined that they
had fallen into the hands of the French, for we learned, at St. Helena,
that they had been seen a few days before from that island. The name of
the French ship which we had fallen in with was _Le Cannonier_, a
sixty-four, from the Isle of France. We understood that she was so badly
wounded, that she was obliged to put into Simon's Bay, not aware, at
that time, that the Cape was again in possession of the English. She
soon found this out, cut and ran, and got clear to the Isle of France.
Our three strayed ships made their appearance at St. Helena the
following day, having seen the French fleet the night after the affair
between the _Tremendous_ and _Le Cannonier_, and, under cover of the
night, escaped unobserved, or they must have been taken, as the French
fleet consisted of five sail or more.

Our reception at St. Helena, by Governor Brooke, was truly splendid and
hospitable. We remained there, I think, eight or ten days, after which
we again stood towards Old England.

We arrived in England some time in October, 1807. We landed at Long
Reach, and proceeded to Dartford, in Kent, from whence I marched my
invalids, or rather had them carried, to Chelsea Hospital--a journey
which I was three days in accomplishing. On the fourth day I reached the
place of destination; and, having made my report to the commandant of
Chelsea, I returned to join the regiment at Dartford. Here we remained
for about a week or ten days, receiving the greatest kindness from the
gentlemen in that town and its vicinity. From thence the regiment was
ordered to Nottingham, and I obtained leave of absence to proceed home.

My primary object in coming to England was the hope of seeing my father;
and I anxiously availed myself of the opportunity which now offered of
revisiting my native village, full of anticipation of the pleasure with
which I should relate my adventures to all who had formerly known me.
The coach which was to convey me to the village of my birth, had not
proceeded many miles, when a coincidence happened, which, though "true
as holy writ," might be thought, without this assurance, to bear the
marks of fiction. On the coach, next to me, sat a pilot from Aldborough,
in Suffolk, who, suddenly addressing himself to me, said, "I really
cannot help thinking, Sir, from your extraordinary resemblance to a
person I once knew, that you are his son." The words, "_once_ knew,"
turned my blood cold, and it was some minutes before I could muster
courage to ask the name of the person to whom he referred. What was my
astonishment when he at once replied, "Shipp!" "Is he then dead, Sir?"
exclaimed I, convinced now that it was my father of whom he spoke. "I
regret to say he is," replied the pilot; and he added, while his lip
quivered, and the tear of sympathy stood in his eye, "You are his son
John--I feel sure that I cannot be mistaken now." At this moment the
coach stopped to change horses, and I jumped off, and, instead of
supping with the rest of the passengers, took a solitary stroll, to hide
my grief. I had left India at a great sacrifice to my prospects. There
were all my friends, and there lay all my interest. I might have made a
very advantageous exchange, and remained in that country; but I could
not resist the temptation of coming to England, from anticipations of
the delight I should enjoy in recounting my life to a parent who had
almost from my infancy been estranged from me. I had now heard, in the
sudden and unexpected manner I have related, of that parent's death!
But, not to dwell long on this painful subject, I made up my mind, that,
notwithstanding what I had just learnt, I would still proceed to
Saxmundham. On arriving there, I found living my father's two brothers,
and my mother's sister. With the latter I took up my quarters, and spent
a most happy fortnight under her roof. To enumerate the alterations
which had been made, both in places and persons, since I left my native
village, or to detail the inquiries I had to answer, and the
congratulations which poured in upon me from all quarters, would be as
uninteresting to the reader as it would be tedious to myself.

I soon returned to Nottingham, and rejoined my regiment. From thence I
was ordered to Wakefield, in Yorkshire, on the recruiting service. Here
nothing but gaiety prevailed; and, as I was the only officer at the
place for a considerable time, I received invitation upon invitation, to
dinners, balls, and suppers; and, to confess the truth, I thought myself
no small personage, which, as I was now in the grenadier company, was
not, in its literal sense, very easily to be controverted.

While I was at this place, I was called upon to perform the office of
second, in an affair of honour between a military officer of rather
diminutive person, and a huge fellow of a civilian. The circumstances
which gave rise to the quarrel were as follow:--

Among the fair attendants of a ball which was given one evening in the
town, was a very pretty girl, on whose charms the tall gentleman had for
some time looked with amorous inclination, and whom, it is to be
presumed, he therefore wished to exclude from the attentions of all but
himself. The young lady herself, however, was not so exclusive in her
notions; and, accordingly, finding her conversation courted, and the
favour of her hand solicited, by a dashing little officer in handsome
uniform, and who, though a warrior of somewhat small dimensions, was
really a dapper, good-looking little fellow, she made no scruple either
of listening to his flattering tongue, or of accepting his hand for the
dance. This preference of the man of steel so irritated his huge rival,
that he determined to pass some insult upon him. He accordingly found a
more compassionate lady as his partner; and, no sooner had the dance
commenced, than he took the first opportunity which presented itself of
treading, with all his weight, on the little officer's toes. In dancing
down a second time, he played him the same trick. Our little hero did
not think it much of a joke to have the full weight of a gentleman full
six-feet-three in height, and stout in proportion, twice on his toes
within a few minutes; but as his tormentor made the most ample apologies
on both occasions, he felt fully disposed to endure the pain with as
much fortitude as possible, and to attribute the occurrence to accident;
when his little rustic beauty, who had more carefully watched and better
understood the manoeuvres of the neglected swain, whispered in his ear,
"A pointed insult, Sir." These words roused the blood of the son of Mars
in a moment; he watched the movements of his toe-treading foe, and, just
as he was coming down the middle a third time, to repeat the trick, he
jumped upon a chair, and from thence sprung on his enemy's back, and,
seizing his nose, he wrung it in so unmerciful a manner, as to compel
its proprietor to cry out most piteously for help. The parties were at
length separated by the master of the ceremonies, and a challenge was of
course the result; the gentleman whose nose had been thus scurvily
treated, in the presence of almost the whole town, being compelled
either to fight or to quit society.

Mortal combat having been appointed to take place the next morning, it
was arranged by the seconds that the principals were to be placed back
to back, and that from thence each party was to step six paces, and then
to fire together by signal.

Preliminaries being thus concerted, and the fatal morning having
arrived, the parties met punctually at the appointed spot, and were duly
ranged with their backs to each other. At this moment the contrast
between the courage of the two gentlemen was to the full as apparent as
the ludicrous disproportion in their size. When I was placing them on
the line drawn by me for their march, my little man, who possessed true
"pluck," and was as cool as a cucumber, observing the trepidation of his
opponent, whispered to me, just loud enough to be overheard, "Where
shall I hit him, Shipp? Shall I wing him?" On hearing this, the knees of
the six-foot Yorkshireman, which were already on the trot, broke into a
full gallop; and, when his second placed the pistol, duly primed and
loaded, into his hand, he seized it by the muzzle. This mistake, as I
always loved fair play, I rectified; and, at last, the word "March" was
given. Away went long-legs, getting over at least three yards of ground
at each stride; and, had we permitted him to proceed at this rate, the
one might as well have fired from the top of St. Paul's, and the other
from Table Mountain; so the seconds saved him the trouble of extending
his walk any further, by measuring twelve paces; and the signal having
been given to fire, the little one's ball cut through the collar of his
affrighted opponent's coat, and the big one's nearly shot his own toes
off. At this crisis of the affair, the gigantic rustic was scarcely so
tall as his little rival, and his knees and body were so inclined to
take a more firm position, that we expected every moment he would fall
flat on the earth; when his second roused him by saying, "Come, Sir, we
must have another shot." This brought him fully to his senses, and he
exclaimed, throwing down his pistol, "I'll see you d----d first; he has
put it through my coat already, and the next time I may get it where the
tailor cannot mend it. No, no; I am perfectly satisfied; so I wish you a
good morning." And off he trudged, at a pretty round pace, to the great
amusement of the other three, as well as of some country bumpkins, who
were grinning from behind an adjoining hedge, and who roared out, "Well
done, little un; bravo, little robin-redbreast." By the result of this
affair, the six-feet-three gentleman lost his honour as well as his
dearie, and the subject was the theme of many a song in Wakefield for
years after.

The routine of dissipation which was kept up at Wakefield, was not to be
sustained by me without expense; and to meet these expenses I spent more
than my income. This extravagance--with the loss of fifty pounds, of
which I was robbed by my servant, and the assistance of a designing
sergeant, who took advantage of my youth and inexperience--soon involved
me in debts, to liquidate which I was obliged to apply for permission to
sell my commission. This, in consideration of my services, was readily
granted; and, having effected a sale, I paid every shilling of my debts,
and with the residue of the money repaired to London, where, in about
six months, I found myself without a shilling, without a home, and
without a friend. Thus circumstanced, my fondness of the profession
induced me to turn my thoughts to the army again. I could see no earthly
difficulty why I should not rise in the same way I had before; and
accordingly I enlisted at Westminster, in his majesty's 24th
Dragoons,[11] and in two or three days after went with the
recruiting-sergeant to the cavalry depôt at Maidstone, then under the
command of Major-General George Hay. I had not been there long before an
officer, who had served with me in campaigns in India, arrived at the
depôt, and, immediately recognizing me, my history was made known to the
commanding officer, and I was promoted to the rank of sergeant. I
remained at the depôt about three months, at the expiration of which we
were ordered to India, and I embarked as acting quarter-master on board
the _New Warren Hastings_, Captain Larkins, and sailed from Spithead on
the 8th day of January, 1808.

We experienced a most terrific gale in the British Channel, and were at
last obliged to run for Torbay, where we brought up near where the East
Indiaman, the _Abergavenny_, was lost. Near us lay a ship of war, from
which, at the imminent hazard of the lives of an officer and six men, a
boat was sent off to our ship, the crew of which, after riding in safety
over the mountainous waves, desired us, in a most authoritative tone, to
throw out a rope. All hands were at the leeward side in a moment, when
there was a general whispering amongst the tars. "Shiver my timbers,"
said one, "but that looks like a press."--"Start me," said another, "but
so it does." Thus went round the general buzz, when the man of
authority, in size not much larger than a quaker,[12] with a sword as
long as himself, and a huge cocked-hat, as big as a gaff top-sail, which
he skulled off with as much grace and majesty as a grand bashaw, flew up
the side of the ship in an instant. He saluted the quarter-deck, as is
usual, then mounted on tiptoe, and danced up to the captain, who was on
deck, and, with the authority of an admiral of the red, demanded to see
the ship's books. At this sound every sailor writhed his features and
limbs into the most ludicrous distortions; some limped, others stooped,
and all did their utmost to appear as decrepit and unfit for service as
possible. As our ship was then in imminent danger of going ashore, the
captain remonstrated, setting forth the perilous situation of his ship,
the number of lives, and the amount of property on board; but
notwithstanding that we were at that moment dragging our two anchors,
the little officer persisted in obeying the orders of his commander, and
walked off with six of our very best seamen. By the loss of these men,
our ship was involved in double the danger she was in before, as they
were our ablest hands. Whether or not this was a justifiable act, I am
unacquainted; but its enforcement at such a conjuncture seems sadly at
variance with the principles of humanity. Fortunately for us, however,
the storm soon abated, and the following morning, ere the feathered
tribe were on the wing, we again stood on our way towards our destined
port. Our ship had suffered but little injury, and she now scudded
sweetly along the blue waters, her white sails swollen with majestic
pride, and the eye of every one on board lingering, until it was lost in
the distance, on that dear isle from which we were so rapidly departing.
After this, we had a long and tedious voyage, in which much misery was
experienced by all the troops on board, in consequence of the cruel and
despotic conduct of our commanding officer. This gentleman is now no
more; and, if it were on this account only, I should refrain from
mentioning his name. For this, and other reasons, I shall withhold from
the reader all detail of conduct which I have myself long tried to
forget; and content myself by stating, in justification of the epithets
applied by me to such conduct, that the cat-o'-nine-tails was constantly
at work; so much so, that Captain Larkins at length interfered, and
protested "that he would not have his quarter-deck converted into a
slaughterhouse, nor the eyes of the ladies on board disgusted with the
sight of the naked back of a poor screaming soldier, every time they
came upon deck."

The distant low-land peeping from afar, and the company of little
messengers from the myrtle grove, at length apprised us that we were in
sight of the long-looked-for haven. The wind was contrary, and night had
begun to throw over the silvery deep her sombre mantle; so that we were
obliged to stand out to sea, to avoid getting into the currents that
prevail near this land. Early in the morning it was dark and hazy, but
at about ten o'clock it cleared up: the sun shed his bright beams over
the Indian Ocean; the little harbinger of peace was again on the wing;
and we again beheld the land.

All the passengers were now promenading the quarter-deck: some viewing
the beauty of the scenery; others whispering sad notes of farewell love;
and all anxiously looking forward to the moment of disembarkation.

We were crowding all possible sail to get the ship safe into the river
by night. The wind was fair, and the sky was spotless, save here and
there some little white clouds, that seemed to dance about us. In an
instant after, the ship was thrown on her beam-ends, her gunwales under
water, and passengers tumbling and rolling over each other. The crew had
to struggle hard to keep her head above water. Every eye was wildly
fixed on the captain, and every cheek wore a death-like paleness. At
last, away went her fore-top mast, top-gallant and royal-mast, foreyard,
main-royal-mast, main-top-gallant, and main-top-mast; and her mizen-mast
was much injured. In that short moment the cup of bliss was dashed from
our lips, and we lay a complete wreck upon the water; but, the masts
having gone, carrying everything before them, and the ship having
righted, every hand was as instantaneously set to work, and busily
employed in remedying the evils and clearing the wreck. It was imagined
at first that the ship had gone ashore; but, on trying her pumps, it
appeared that she had made no water. We soon discovered that our
misfortune was occasioned by what are termed, in those seas, white
squalls. These come on without any previous indication; and, though of
short duration, are so destructive while they last, that no ship under
heavy sail can stand against them. These squalls are most frequent when
the sky is clearest. They are supposed to be contained in those little
white flying clouds, which, previous to the storm, are seen hovering
over the ship, as though watching to catch the mariners off their guard.

We were again obliged to stand out to sea; but we soon cleared away, and
once more stood towards land. The day was rainy and hazy, when through
the darksome mist we beheld a sail, and soon discovered, to our great
joy, that it was the boat of a Calcutta pilot, who immediately came on
board our vessel. On examining the masts, we discovered that the
maintop-mast would not bear her sails; therefore splinters and stays
were immediately put on. The day brightened up, but the wind blew
strong; so, not being able to discover landmarks, we cast anchor for the
night. The next morning we found that we were so close to land that we
could see men walking on the sea-beach, and distinguish huts and towns
in the distance. We weighed anchor early, and stood towards Saugar, the
wind blowing a smart gale. At one time we approached so near the
breakers that we expected to go ashore, and a few minutes after we
shipped a tremendous sea, the major part of which went over the poop and
through the great cabin windows, carrying trunks, boxes, beds, and
everything before it. I was on deck at the time: the ship's stern seemed
to be fastened, and she shook much; but at last on she went. I have no
hesitation in saying that her stern struck the ground, but no injury was
done beyond sousing a few trunks and beds. We at last reached Saugar in
safety; but before we arrived there our feelings were excited to a high
pitch of sympathy by an interesting scene. Captain Larkins was standing
on the poop, close by where I stood, with his glass at his eye examining
the ships which were lying at anchor, when he suddenly exclaimed, "I
surely know that ship lying yonder: my eyes cannot deceive me--it's my
old ship, the _Warren Hastings_." The pilot was requested to go within
hail of her. All hands were upon deck; every eye fixed upon the strange
ship; and sailors and soldiers manned the rigging. The captain got the
large speaking-trumpet, and bellowed out, "What ship, a-hoy?" Answer,
"The _Warren Hastings_--what ship are you?" Answer, "The _New Warren
Hastings_." Here the shouting of the crews of both ships was quite
deafening. Our captain could not say a syllable more, but was so much
affected as to shed a tear to the memory of his old ship, which he had
manfully defended, but lost to some French ship-of-war. She had been
retaken by some of our cruisers.

A short time after this we came to anchor a little above Saugar; and the
following day we were shipped on board sloops, and sailed up the river
Hoogley, and in about a week came to anchor off Fort William, Calcutta,
and were again placed on _terra firma_. We remained in the fort about a
fortnight; and, while boats were in preparation for our conveyance up
the river Ganges, to our respective regiments, all was gaiety and mirth.

The monsoon, or rainy season, having commenced, we sailed from Calcutta,
under the command of Colonel Wade, on route to Cawnpore, where we
arrived in safety in about three months, with the loss of seven or eight
men drowned, and of a few others, who died from having eaten too freely
of unripe fruit.

[Illustration]

[Illustration]

FOOTNOTES:

[11] The 24th Dragoons was raised in 1794 as the 27th Light Dragoons.
After serving in San Domingo and at the Cape, it went to India and
served with distinction in the campaigns under Lord Lake, for which it
received a "standard of honour" from the East India Company. It was
re-numbered the 24th Light Dragoons in 1803. It returned home from India
in 1818 and was disbanded. The uniform in Shipp's time was French grey,
with bright yellow facings and silver lace and buttons.

[12] A false gun, made of wood, about two feet long.

[Illustration: EUROPEAN CAVALRY OF SHIPP'S DAY.

From a Sketch taken at the time.]




CHAPTER X.


The day before we arrived at Cawnpore, Colonel Wade sent for me, and
gave me a strong and handsome letter of recommendation. In the evening
of the next day we marched to tents which had been previously pitched
for our reception. Here we found two officers of our own regiment, ready
to receive us, with one of whom I had often dined when an officer in the
same camp. He received me kindly, and promised me his friendship.
Nothing of moment occurred during the short time I was at this station.

Having refitted, we started on route to Meerut, about three hundred
miles by land, under the command of two officers, whose sole study was
to promote our happiness and welfare. I do not know that I ever spent a
happier time. Our march was always over by nine o'clock, and we encamped
under the salubrious scent and pleasant shade of the lofty mango. After
journeying in this pleasant manner, we reached Meerut on the 9th day of
November, 1809, having been eleven months and a day from England. Here I
was welcomed by all my old comrades, and found myself full sergeant in
Captain Beattie's troop.

On the evening of our arrival we were inspected by the commanding
officer, now Major-General Need. I was well received by all the
officers, and indeed by all the corps, save two or three corporals whom
I had supplanted in their long-cherished hopes of promotion. This
naturally placed me in no very enviable situation with these men, and
several attempts were made to try my courage; but I was too well versed
with the rank I held, to permit myself to be imposed on or annoyed. When
they found this, their ire passed away and their grievances were
forgotten. After the inspection, my commanding officer called me on one
side, and said, "I am much grieved to see you in your present situation,
after the many laurels you have gained in India, but I feel pleasure in
having it in my power to promote you to the rank of sergeant; and, if
you conduct yourself well, be assured I shall not lose sight of your
further promotion." I was obliged once more to go through a regular and
systematic course of drills, both on horseback and on foot; but, as I
was already well acquainted with both, I was soon dismissed.

I had not been in the regiment above one year, when a colonel,
commanding a corps of the Company's native cavalry, who had known me
before, offered me a riding-mastership, a situation equal to an
ensigncy. I was elated with the idea; it was the situation which, of all
others, I should have fancied. I dressed myself in my best, and off I
marched with the colonel's kind invitation in my hand, not having the
shadow of a doubt of the full and joyous concurrence of my commanding
officer, who, I thought, would gladly embrace the opportunity of giving
me a proof of the friendship he had so often professed for me. I
presented the letter, and begged his consent and aid in the fulfilment
of my wishes. He read it, paused, knitted his dark eyebrows, and it was
so evident that he was displeased, that I began to muster my offences,
but I could think of nothing in which I had offended him. Imagine my
surprise and mortification when he returned the little document into my
hand, accompanied with this sweet and consoling declaration, "I shall
not recommend you for any such thing." He was just about to leave the
room, when I presumed to remonstrate on the cruelty of such a denial, in
preventing me from getting such a respectable situation; and I pushed
the matter home by asking him if he thought me unworthy of it, or if I
had displeased him in anything. He said, "No; but," continued he, "don't
you think I like good men in my regiment as well as Colonel K----?
Besides," he said, "what am I to do for a sergeant-major if you leave
the regiment, or perhaps for an adjutant, if anything should happen to
either of them?" Two of these persons were younger than myself, and in
full and blooming health. I felt my pride wounded and my feelings hurt,
and I could not help expressing my sentiments to that effect, and we
parted at enmity. This was a death-blow to my present hopes. I made the
best excuse I could to the colonel who had made me the kind offer, and I
was in a short time made drill-corporal in my own regiment, and
afterwards drill-sergeant. This was a situation I was fond of, and a
preparatory step to that of regimental sergeant-major. For a time this
new toy pleased me, for I would, at any time, sooner command than be
commanded; but the duties of a drill-sergeant are very laborious.

I went on tolerably well with the troubles and vexations of this arduous
office, when, one fine morning, it was rumoured through the lines that
the sergeant-major was defunct in hospital. I was congratulated from all
quarters as his successor, as a matter of course, and the eye of the
whole regiment was upon the drill-sergeant. I expected a summons every
moment from the commanding officer. So sanguine was I myself, that I had
directed that all my "traps" might be put in moveable order; when, lo!
another sergeant was appointed sergeant-major, leaving poor me the butt
and jeer of the whole corps. I could not imagine what could possibly be
the cause of this strange appointment. I say strange, for two reasons:
first, that the situation had been promised to me; and, secondly, that
the sergeant who was appointed was, of all others, the most unfit for
it. I felt hurt beyond description, but my spirit was too proud to
permit me to ask why I had thus been passed over. I bore it as patiently
as I could, still trying to kill care by fagging at the drills; and no
doubt some of the poor fellows under me felt the weight of my
disappointed hopes, for I had them out late and early. I mentioned,
however, the circumstance to my captain, and told him I would resign
both my drill-sergeantship and also my three other stripes; but the
captain, having more prudence and temper than his sergeant, advised me
to put up with it, saying, that he had no doubt the colonel had
something better in store for me. This supposition appeased my troubled
mind, and I endeavoured to smother my grief by making myself a better
drill; and in a short time the storm had blown over, and the event was
nearly obliterated from my memory. After this affair I always avoided
the colonel, and whenever chance threw me in his way, I gave him the
customary salute due to his rank, but accompanied with a few dark looks,
as tokens of my gratitude.

Thus I went on, chewing the cud of disappointment, when one morning I
happened to be straying down a narrow lane, brooding over my
misfortunes, and trying to assign some reason why my commanding officer
had passed me over in promotion, when, in turning a corner, I almost
came in contact with the object of my meditations, who could soon have
put my mind at peace--the colonel himself. I tendered him a most formal
salute, almost as stiff as my feelings were towards him; this dumb
greeting being garnished with one of my blackest looks. I was passing
on, with one eye looking over my shoulder, and at last I turned my whole
body round to have a good stare at him; when, to my surprise, as if he
had anticipated my thoughts, I found that he also had countermarched. We
were now face to face, and retreat would have been unsoldier-like; so I
commenced the attack, by approaching the spot where he stood, as if I
was returning home to my barracks. When passing him, I of course gave
him another salute, somewhat smoother than the former. From this
amendment in my behaviour, I was in hopes he would speak to me as I
passed, for I was ripe with a speech as long as my sabre, which I had
been some time cementing together. I had hardly gone past, when he said,
"Halloa, Shipp--come here." I approached him, and, after giving him a
more conciliatory salute than usual, was just about to open my battery
upon him, when he commenced a hedge-fire, by saying, in a kind and
friendly manner, "Well, Shipp, how do you get on?" Here was a pretty
preface to my intended speech! I stood at attention, knowing the respect
due to my commanding officer, and replied, "I get on but badly, Sir."
"How is that?" said the colonel. I said, "I had but little encouragement
to get on well, since he was pleased to pass me over in
promotion."--"Why, then," said he, "did you not come and ask me for it?"
Here my spirit nettled; I told him, no doubt impetuously, that, if he
did not think me worthy of it unsolicited, I should never ask it of him.
By this I struck the chord of his displeasure, and he replied, "Then you
will never get it." I tipped him another salute, rather bordering on
impudence, and was in the act of facing to the right-about, and for this
purpose had drawn my right foot back to my left heel, when he turned his
displeasure into kindness, and said, "Stop, sergeant; suppose I have
something better for you than what I have taken from you, and which you
did not think worth soliciting." He said this with an inquiring eye, and
I replied, that my prospects in life depended entirely upon his
friendship towards me. If he withheld that, I had nothing further to
hope. He answered, "My good-will and friendship you have; but you must
divest yourself of that impetuosity of temper, and depend upon it I
shall not lose sight of your welfare: go home, and keep yourself quiet."
Thus we parted. I wanted a balm of this kind to soothe and calm me; for,
what with my disappointment, and the trouble I had with obstinate young
soldiers and drunken old ones, my patience and temper were really worn
threadbare, and, from constant bellowing at the drills, my voice had
become as gruffly sonorous as a bad church organ. But, in all my
distresses, I never lost sight of my duties and respect to my superiors,
knowing that any neglect on my part would lose me everything. I was on
good terms with every officer and man in the regiment, and made it my
study to be the first on parade, and the last off. I had risen through
the several gradations of lance-corporal to full--lance-sergeant to
full--drill-corporal--drill-sergeant--pay-sergeant--and
troop-sergeant-major--without being once confined, or on any occasion
reprimanded by a superior officer.

In the year 1813, another sergeant-major made a retrograde movement, and
tumbled into his grave; but I still could not make up my mind to solicit
the appointment of my commanding officer, although I saw several other
sergeants running down to ask for it. Notwithstanding this, I kept at
home, where I dressed, expecting every moment to receive a summons from
the colonel, who, I thought, surely would not again pass me over. Here I
waited, looking every now and then out of my barrack-room window, but
neither messenger nor orders arrived. I began to think it had been given
away a second time, and a dreadful struggle ensued between pride and
interest; the former said, "Don't go;" the latter, "Go, or you get
nothing." After a long contest, pride succeeded, and I remained where I
was. At evening drill I was early at my post, and was going through my
regular course of evolutions, when the adjutant rode up to me, and said,
"Why don't you go and ask the commanding officer to give you the
vacancy?" I replied, "Sir, I should deem myself unworthy of such a
situation, did I beg or cringe for it. If my commanding officer deemed
me deserving of such an appointment, he would give it me without
hesitation; and, should he be so kind, he may rely upon my strictly
performing the duties intrusted to me, and thus proving my gratitude;
but ask it I never can." After this fine speech, I went on with my
drill; when the adjutant, after pausing a few seconds, said, "Well, if
you are too proud to ask for it, I am not;" and off he gallopped. In a
quarter of an hour he returned, and said, "You are appointed
sergeant-major." I thanked him most cordially, and assured him he should
never have cause to regret his kindness. He replied, "Shipp, to be
candid with you, I admire your proper spirit in not begging the
situation, nor does your commanding officer think the worse of you for
it: you will immediately move into the sergeant-major's bungalow, and
assume the duties of that office. I need not, I am sure, inform you what
they are." On the following morning I moved into my new house, and
published my own appointment. Here all the cares and anxieties of my
past life were forgotten. The very idea of having the whole regiment
under my special command at drill, was to me inexpressibly delightful,
and I looked forward to the day as the consummation of my military
glory.

As a groundwork for proceeding properly in my new office, I established
an inseparable vacuum between my rank and that of the other
non-commissioned officers, treating them with every respect consistent
with theirs, and, in time, making them sensible that such a difference
must be established between their station and that of the privates under
their command. I enforced prompt obedience and attention from them, and
they from those under them. This they at first construed into pride on
my part; but, in time, that prejudice wore off, and they obeyed with
pleasure. Those who proved refractory were removed from their
situations, and those more obedient promoted in their stead. Thus things
went on smoothly and pleasantly; and, in two or three months, I could
trust them in the discharge of their duties with confidence, and they
soon learned how far they could go with me. I had a strict and vigilant
adjutant; he made a strict and vigilant sergeant-major; he made good
non-commissioned officers; and they good private soldiers. Thus,
discipline and good-will towards each other went hand in hand together.
My situation was a respectable one, and, what was equally pleasant, a
lucrative one. I had as many titles as any peer in the kingdom:--

    J. Shipp, R.S.M.--Regimental Sergeant-Major.
    J. Shipp, G.K.--Gaol-Keeper.
    J. Shipp, U.T.--Undertaker.
    J. Shipp, L.M.--Log-Maker.

The perquisites of all these situations brought my pay to a handsome
amount; I was respected by the officers, and loved by the men; and I had
scarcely a wish ungratified. The year round I always found the same
people, with but little variation, in the congee-house; and one man, a
fine young fellow, was never off my gaol-book. The moment he was
released he was assuredly in the guard-room again, and from thence to
his old place of abode. I once asked him how he could, month after
month, prefer that solitary and secluded life to that of liberty. He
replied, "Habit is second nature," for there, he said, "he could, alone
and undisturbed, brood over his sad and hitherto melancholy career." He
concluded in a most pathetic manner: "Sergeant-major, I have never done
any good since the time your predecessor got me flogged. I assure you, I
endeavour with all my energy to forget it, but I cannot; it crushes me
to the ground, and that day's disgrace has been my ruin. I am of a good
family, but I never can or will return to disgrace those dear parents
with a scarified back." Some three months after this he died, in a sad
state of inebriety.

One day I was going my usual round with the orderly-officer, who twice a
day visited the congee-house. This officer was a famous one for scenting
anything; he could smell a cigar a mile off. In going round the yard,
which is enclosed by a tremendous high wall, he discovered a large
beef-bone, recently dropped. The sergeant was called to account for this
ominous appearance. This sergeant was a shrewd fellow, and he
immediately said, "Oh, Sir, the pelicans have dropped it." This was
very plausible, for these birds will carry enormous bones; and
frequently, when fighting for them, they drop them, so that this might
very probably have been the case. The moment the dinner-trumpet sounds,
whole flocks of these birds are in attendance at the barrack doors,
waiting for bones, or anything that the soldiers may be pleased to throw
them. The men were in the habit of playing them many mischievous tricks;
but, notwithstanding this, at the well-known sound of the dinner-trumpet
they were regularly at their station. Some of the more mischievous boys
would tie two large bones together, and throw to them: these would be
swallowed with the greatest avidity by two of those poor hungry
mendicants, who, in general, would both soar above the barrack-tops with
their prey, pulling and hauling against each other, and attended by a
hundred crows and kites, pecking them on the head most unmercifully.
Sometimes they would throw out a single bone, a pretty large one, with a
string and small kite at the end of it, or a large piece of rag. One of
the pelicans having swallowed the bone, he would fly aloft, with the
string and kite hanging out of his mouth, and with hundreds of his own
tribe after him, in hopes he might throw up the bone again, which these
birds can do with the greatest facility. Thus ascending, they are lost
sight of amidst the clouds; but the same gentleman would frequently be
in attendance the following day at dinner-hour, with a portion of the
string hanging to him.

We had not gone much further on our round, when the officer scented a
bundle of cigars, which he picked up and archly said, "Sergeant, what
luxurious dogs these pelicans must be! I have already seen beef, mutton,
and pork bones, and here I find a bundle of cigars. I should not be
surprised if I stumbled upon a bottle of brandy next." This the artful
sergeant did not know how to account for; but the thing was obvious
enough: the whole had been thrown over for the prisoners, by some of
their friends. The sergeant was severely admonished for his neglect of
duty, and a long conversation then took place between me and the
orderly-officer, on the subject of these wonderful birds. They grow so
tame that they will feed out of your hand. At night, they roost on the
tops of the barracks, and on trees in their vicinity. In the morning
early, they pay their respects to the river-side in search of any dead
bodies that may be washed ashore; and it is a most appalling sight to
see those ravenous creatures, with hundreds of enormous vultures,
tearing human bodies to pieces. If you live on the banks of the Ganges,
it is no uncommon sight to see crows, vultures, and hawks, riding down
the river on dead bodies, feeding on them as they sail along. This is
easily accounted for. Hindoos, in general, are committed to the pile
after death, and burned to ashes; but the poor people, who cannot
perform this last office to their departed relatives, burn the hair off
the body, which is then committed to the Holy Gunga, as they call the
Ganges. The bodies, when exposed to the sun, swell to an enormous and
frightful size.

One day, I was walking on the banks of the Ganges, when I saw a group of
people sitting together, and mumbling something to themselves. Near them
I saw a corpse, wrapped in a white sheet, with its feet covered with
water. A few moments after, a young man, I should think about twenty
years of age, shouldered the corpse, and, walking slowly to an elevated
bank, he hurled it into the river, in the same manner you would a log of
wood. He then plunged in after the body, and deprived it of the
winding-sheet, leaving the corpse to float down the tide in a state of
nudity. When the youth reached the shore, I asked him who the young
person was that he had thrown into the river. He replied, with a kind of
grin, "My wife." I said, "You don't seem to be very sorry about her." He
said, "No; it was God's pleasure." I asked him how old she was, and he
said, "Thirteen years old." I then inquired if he had any family. He
replied, "Not now; she had one, a little girl, but that the Gunga had
got the day before." I then asked him how long his wife had been dead,
when he informed me that she died the moment before I came up. The
father and mother of the unfortunate girl were both there, but seemed as
indifferent as the rock on which they had perched themselves to watch
her progress down the rippling stream--the cold grave of millions.

[Illustration]

[Illustration]




CHAPTER XI.


Having now a respectable home, and an easy income, I began to look
around me for a wife, to share my fortune, and to drink with me of the
salubrious cup of contentment. I had been for some time intimately
acquainted with a most respectable family, the father of which was a
conductor to the commissariat department. He had three daughters, whom
he took great pains to bring up in a respectable manner, and they all
did credit to his fatherly care, and lived together in great affection
and domestic comfort. To the eldest of these I became most sincerely
attached. I asked her hand in marriage, and it was granted; but the
father stipulated, that, in consideration of his daughter's tender
years, the marriage was not to take place for the space of two years. In
the meantime, every preparation was to be made for our mutual happiness.

Thus things went on till the latter end of the year 1815, when my good
friend the colonel was promoted to the rank of major-general, and
consequently bade farewell to his old corps, the 24th Dragoons, in which
he was respected and loved. Scarcely had he departed, when I drew up a
short memorial to the Marquis of Hastings, then Governor-General of
India, and my new commanding officer, Lieutenant-Colonel Philpot,
immediately dispatched it to head-quarters, Calcutta, accompanied with a
handsome recommendatory letter from himself. When I presented this
memorial to my commanding officer, he replied, "Shipp, I am glad you
have done so. I was yesterday speaking to your friend, Major Covell,
about you. I will forward it with pleasure, and I hope it may succeed."
Some twenty days after this, I was sent for in a great hurry to the
riding-school, where the colonel was looking at some young stud horses.
I immediately attended the summons. He was standing with his back
towards the riding-school door when I entered, so I waited at some
distance, when the adjutant said, "Here is the sergeant-major." The
colonel immediately came up to me, seized my left arm with the hand of
his right, and thus led me out of the school. No sooner were we out of
sight than he pulled out a letter, and I shall never forget his delight
when he grasped my hand, and said, "Shipp, I sincerely congratulate you
on your appointment. The Marquis of Hastings has been pleased to meet
both your and my wishes; you are appointed to an ensigncy in his
Majesty's 87th regiment,[13] and directed to join that corps
immediately: but this you must promise me, to keep the affair secret
till to-morrow, or I shall be teased out of my life for your
appointment. I would ask you to dine with me to-day, but for this wish
to keep it a secret. I shall therefore have that pleasure another time."
I expressed my most sincere thanks; the colonel put the letter into my
hand; he went to his horses again; and I went to evening parade.

In the evening, after my duty was done, I went down to see my intended,
and to tell her and her family of my good fortune. On my walk hither I
had a most strange feeling; it was not that of elation of spirits, but
rather of a dreary and gloomy turn. In this mood I reached the abode of
my little wife, before I was aware of my near approach, and had almost
stumbled upon her good father before I perceived him. Indeed, I should
have passed him but for his usual salutation, "Ah, John, is that you?
how are you?" This address roused me from my reverie, and I replied,
with affected dignity, "Come, Sir, be a little more respectful to your
superior officer, or I shall send you to the congee-house." Here I could
not help lowering the ensign's mighty dignity, by bursting into a loud
laugh. The old gentleman did not seem to know what to make of it; but I
suppose he thought me tipsy, for at last he said, "What's the matter,
John? you seem a little out of sorts this evening." I then took his arm;
we walked together towards the house; and on the way I told him the
whole affair. He replied, "Then of course that will break off the match
with my poor Ann; you will now look higher." At this the ensign's blood
rose, and he got nettled, and warmly replied, "You have mistaken your
man, Sir. I could never, after winning the affections of any woman,
forsake or desert her. No: it was with tenfold pleasure I came down to
assure her of my unalterable affection." Here my friend gave me his
honest hand, and I have no doubt his heart with it; and thus, hand in
hand, we entered where all the family were seated round a table at work,
their usual evening's employment.

On entering the room, the father, addressing himself to the domestic
circle assembled, said in a jocular manner, "Mrs. H. and children,
permit me to introduce to your acquaintance Ensign John Shipp, Esq., of
the Horse Marines--I mean His Majesty's Own Irish Regiment of Foot." I
made a bow worthy of his Majesty's commission and of the corps to which
I was appointed; but this profound obeisance only set the young ones
tittering, and one of them, the youngest, had the impudence to point
the finger of derision at me, saying, "He an ensign! so is my cat,"
which cat she immediately paraded on the table on his two hinder
extremities, calling him "Ensign Shipp." After this I seated myself
close to my little intended, and whispered the whole truth into her ear;
but, instead of evincing the joy which I expected, she turned pale and
gloomy. I inquired the cause. She was humble as she was good, and she
replied, "I am sorry for it; for I suppose you will not condescend to
look upon a poor conductor's daughter." Here the ensign's ire was again
roused to a pitch far beyond that of a sergeant-major, and I said, "What
the devil (I could not help the warm expression) do you all take me
for?--man or beast? No, Ann; have a better opinion of me." I then
extended my hand towards her, and pledged the honour of an ensign that
it was hers, and hers only. She seized my hand and bathed it with her
tears. I then directed the conversation into a new channel, by turning
my indignation on the little one who had metamorphosed the cat into an
ensign; but, as I bethought myself that I really had seen less sagacious
animals bearing that commission, I kissed her for her impudence, and
forgave her.

The following day I had my hair cut _à la ensign_, and ordered a new
suit of regimentals; and the third day I dined at the mess of my old
corps, to which I had a general invitation during the time I remained at
the station. I received the most marked kindness from the regiment on my
promotion. Invitation followed upon invitation, so that it took up
nearly the whole of the ensign's time to make and write excuses; the
officers vied with each other in politeness and liberality; and I shall
ever remember the generosity of the late 24th regiment with feelings of
gratitude.

Having arranged my affairs, I left Cawnpore for Dinapore, on the 1st day
of January, 1816, having first concerted everything for my marriage as
soon as I should be settled with my regiment. I reached the station
where my corps was quartered, in five days--a distance of four hundred
miles.

On the morning of the 5th day I landed, for the purpose of reporting my
arrival to my commanding officer. After wandering about the station a
considerable time, without seeing a single European soldier, at last I
met a woman, and I asked her if she would have the goodness to inform me
where I could find the commanding officer of the 87th regiment. I found
by her manners (I mean ill manners) that she had early paid her devoirs
to the shrine of rum. I repeated, "Will you, my good woman, have the
goodness to inform me where I can find the 87th regiment?"

"What! the old Fogs?"[14] said she.

"Fogs!" said I, "no: the 87th regiment, I mean."

"Is it making fun of me you are?"

I replied, "No, my good woman: I really want to find where the 87th
regiment are."

"Sure they are just after laving this place, becase they are gone away
these three big days."

"Gone!" I repeated, "where?"

"Fait, to fight against Paul."

"Paul!" said I, "who the devil is he?"

"Arrah! bad luck to you, is it after mocking Judy Flanagan you are, you
tafe?" I again assured the woman that I was in earnest (for she had put
herself in a boxing attitude), and informed her that I was an officer of
that corps. Here she burst into a loud horse-laugh, slapping her legs
with both her hands, "You an officer of the old Fogs! ha, ha, ha! Arrah,
none of your blarney, honey."

"However you may laugh," said I, "I am an officer of the old Fogs, as
you call them, and I am come to join them."

"Then," replied she, "you might have saved yourself the trouble, joy;
for the divel a one is here, except the quarter-master, and I could not
find him this morning; but does your honour really belong to the old
Fogaboloughs?" I pledged the honour of an ensign, upon which she
stretched forth her brawny paw, and grasped my hand, saying, "Give us
your daddle, your honour; sure I am always glad to see any of the old
corps here." She gave me positive proof of her attachment to the
regiment, by nearly squeezing my hand off, and she was about to confirm
the whole with a kiss, but I parried her in this kind intention. She
then entered on a eulogium of the regiment. "The divel a better corps
within a whole day's march. The regiment is a credit to your honour.
Och, thase are the boys for fighting!" Here she pulled up her petticoats
nearly to her knees, and commenced capering and humming a tune. I could
not help laughing, for she footed it with the skill of a dancing-master.
When she had pretty nearly winded herself, she again seized my hand, and
asked me for something "to drink his honour's health, and success to the
old Fogs." I told her that, if she could inform me if there was any
person belonging to the regiment at the station, I might be inclined to
give her something to drink.

"Thank your honour," said she; "sure, the adjutant, and one Captain
Bell, are left behind."

"The adjutant here?" answered I, "what--sick or on duty?"

"Neither, your honour: he is confined as snug as a bug to his own room,
and is a prisoner besides. Sure, there has been a mighty blusteration
and hubbub between him and the same Captain Bell."

I inquired what had been the matter.

"Matter, your honour! matter enough: there has been bloody murder
betwixt them; and sure there is no end to the murders in this regiment."

"What! have they been fighting?" said I, meaning a duel.

"Fighting! sure enough."

"Is the captain also a prisoner?"

"Snug enough, joy."

"Will you be kind enough to show me where the adjutant's quarters are?"

"To be sure, honey: he lives just over against the corner house, just
over by the other side of the chapel, and forenent the main guard-room:
sure anybody will inform you that knows."

"I fear I shall never find it, with all these leading points," said I;
"give me some place near it."

"Well, your honour, do you see yonder woman standing all alone, with a
man spaking to her? Or can you see the house round the corner?"

Finding now, from the information proffered by this lady, that the more
explanatory she attempted to be, the more unintelligible she became, I
cut the matter short by giving her a rupee, and I took my leave of this
ardent admirer of the old Fogs, with her parting benediction, "God bless
your honour; may your honour never die till the side of an old house
fall on you and kill you!"

Having parted from this pretty specimen of my new regiment, I inquired
for the adjutant's quarters, which were pointed out to me. At the door I
met a soldier, of whom I inquired if the adjutant was at home, and was
informed he had just gone out. I said I would wait till he returned; so
I seated myself, and in about five minutes after he came in; and, when I
informed him who I was, he gave me a hearty welcome, invited me to
breakfast, and I remained with him the two days I stopped at the
station. From this officer I learned that the regiment had left two days
before, against the Nepaulese. This was a piece of news that delighted
me much, although I had not a single thing prepared for such a campaign,
nor was it probable I could procure what was necessary, after the whole
country had been drained of cattle, &c., to supply the army. But,
notwithstanding this, in two days I was ready, so far as carriage; but,
as I could not, by any possibility, get a tent, I was obliged to
manufacture one, something like what our gipsies use, out of a
setterenge, or Indian cotton carpet.

Thus provided, I commenced my march to join the old Fogs, who had
preceded me five marches. The first day I accomplished a distance equal
to the regiment's first two days' marches. The next day I completed two
more, and was handsomely treated by an indigo-planter, in the district
of Tirhoot, where their liberality is noted. I sent on my things, the
next morning, twenty miles, and desired that they might be conveyed
twenty more, should I not reach them that night. I spent the day with my
liberal host, the planter; slept there, and, after eating a hearty
breakfast, started the next morning on horseback, my kind entertainer
having laid horses for me on the road. I overtook my things about two
miles from their destination, and put up at another indigo-planter's.
Here I met a young officer, who was also on his way to rejoin the same
division, and, as it proved after a little conversation, the same
regiment. He was very young, and seemed delicate; and, I thought, but
little calculated for such an arduous campaign as the one in prospect.
Here we regaled ourselves till next morning, when we thanked our host
for his liberality, and bade him farewell. This was the last indigo
factory on our road, and travelling without protection was attended with
some little danger, the lowlands being proverbial for murders and
robberies. We were, therefore, now obliged to proceed with caution. In
the day-time we remained in our tents, and at night slept in some hut or
temple. Neither tents nor mud walls were any safeguard against the
desperate thieves in these districts; besides, these lowlands abounded
with tigers, bears, hyænas, wolves, jackals, &c.; and, as these had not
been much accustomed to the sight of Europeans, we could not tell how
far they might be induced to go for such unusual delicacies; so safety
was the parole.

The first march I taught my young companion the art of becoming his own
butcher, cook, &c.; for I killed, skinned, washed, cooked, and eat a
fine young kid, of part of which I made a curry, and grilled the
remainder; of this my young friend partook, with most excellent
appetite. After tea we moved into a village for the night; for some
suspicious fellows had already been seen loitering about. When thus
travelling, I would recommend people to show their fire-arms, and in the
dusk of the evening to fire them off. The dacoits, or low thieves, in
India, although a most desperate set, have the greatest dread of
fire-arms, and will seldom approach those whom they know to possess
them, however ill-disposed they might be under other circumstances.
Thus, I have often, on the rivers Hoogley and Ganges, when coming home
at night in a lone boat, escaped being robbed, and perhaps murdered, by
frequently discharging my fire-arms, while others, who have neglected
this precaution, or perhaps not had fire-arms with them, have been
plundered, and in many instances murdered, in spite of the police kept
on those rivers.

The regiment was now only twenty miles ahead of us. We therefore retired
early to rest, intending to reach the corps the following day. We had
not reposed more than an hour, lying upon our things, when I was awoke
by a noise something like the crowing of the domestic cock, and then
like the barking of a dog. I had been too long in the country not to
know that these crowings and barkings were sure indications of robbers
being on the look-out. I therefore seized my pistol, resolving to have a
shot at whatever first made its appearance. For a time all was still.
There were two doorways to the hut in which we had sheltered ourselves;
and, across each of these doorways lay myself and my young friend. I was
wide awake, and he was just dozing, when, all of a sudden, he jumped up,
and bellowed out, so that his voice re-echoed again, "Who is that?" I
jumped up and said, "What's the matter?" He answered, "Some person's
hand touched my face." I replied, "You must have been dreaming." He said
he was confident that what he said was true. "Well, then, if it is,
don't be afraid," said I. This nettled the young soldier, and he
replied, "No, Sir, I am not so easily frightened as you may imagine." I
thought at one time he was going to give me proof of his valour, by
coming to an open rupture with me; but, at last, we both lay down to
repose again, I thinking to myself, "I shall try your courage by-and-by,
my lad." I pretended to be asleep, and soon heard the thieves on the
move again. I therefore stole silently from my bed, and discharged both
my pistols in the air, bellowing out, with the lungs of an ensign,
"Choor! choor! choor!" which my companion perfectly understood to be,
thieves! thieves! thieves! Hearing this, he made a desperate jump over
my bed, and was out with me in a moment; but he afterwards confessed
that he was most dreadfully alarmed. We retired to rest once more, but
had not lain long before I felt a hand cross my face. I immediately
seized the fellow, but he was so oiled that he slipped through my hands
like an eel, and was out of sight in a moment. I ran out after him, but
he was gone like a whisper on the breeze. At this juncture I heard my
companion crying out, "Where are you, Sir? Where are you, Mr. Shipp?
Don't leave me." When I returned, I found him in a dreadful state of
alarm, and, I must confess, I did not myself half like it. These
nocturnal robbers go perfectly naked, with their heads shaved, and oiled
from head to foot. They seemed bent upon robbing us, for it was strange
that they should have returned after I had fired. However, I reloaded my
pistols, and I said, "Now, Sir, I think we may repose till the
morning."--"Repose, Sir!" he replied; "I don't think I shall sleep again
for a week."--"Nonsense!" said I; "we soldiers must not mind these
little skirmishes. Such things as these happen every day, and we laugh
at them. If we had nothing more to disturb our peace than these little
annoyances, soldiering would be a delightful life indeed. The grand
thing is to keep a good watch, so as not to be taken by surprise."

[Illustration]

FOOTNOTES:

[13] The 87th "Prince of Wales's Own Irish" Regiment of Foot,
re-entitled in 1827 the 87th "Royal Irish Fusiliers" (the facings being
changed from deep-green to blue at the same time), now the 1st Royal
Irish Fusiliers. In 1815, when Shipp was appointed to it, the 87th had
_two_ battalions, the first of which, after some years at the Cape and
Mauritius, landed in Bengal in August that year. The second battalion,
which had greatly distinguished itself in the Peninsula, under command
of Sir Hugh, afterwards Viscount Gough, was at Colchester, where it was
disbanded in February, 1817, the effective officers and men mostly
joining the battalion in India.

[14] The 87th was popularly known as the "Ould Fogs" from its Erse shout
in charging _'Faugh a Ballagh_ (Clear the Way). The _sobriquet_ is often
wrongly assigned to the Connaught Rangers.--ED.




CHAPTER XII.


The next morning we were in marching order betimes, and started with the
determination of joining our regiment as early in the day as possible.
We overtook them about nine o'clock, just as they had crossed a nullah,
and had halted on the opposite bank. I immediately sought the acting
adjutant, from whom, after I had announced my name and delivered my
credentials, I received every politeness and attention. He introduced me
at once to the commanding officer, Lieutenant-Colonel Miller, C.B., who
received me in the most cordial manner, congratulated me on my
appointment, and expressed himself much pleased at my accession to the
regiment. All the officers of the corps flocked round me, and greeted me
in the most handsome and friendly manner, every one of them inviting me
to breakfast. That invitation, however, I had previously received from
the kind commander of the Prince's Own Irish regiment. This liberal
conduct was the more gratifying to my feelings, as I must confess I did
not anticipate any such friendly reception. I was well aware of the
existing prejudice, and the caution with which officers promoted from
the ranks were usually received; but no such prejudice prevailed in this
distinguished corps: on the contrary, had I been the son of a duke, my
reception could not have been more flattering or friendly. It is true
that I had the most flattering letters of introduction from my late
commanding officer to my present; but as I had not delivered them, the
kindness which I experienced was wholly spontaneous and unsolicited, and
the result of liberal and benevolent feeling. My young companion was
received by all in the same handsome manner.

As I found that the jacket, which I had had made for me in haste when I
was ordered to join the regiment, was widely different from the uniform
of the corps, I apologized for this to the colonel while at breakfast,
and he relieved me from all anxiety on that score, by replying, "Ah,
never mind; the one you have will do very well for fighting in, as it is
supposed we shall have some pretty hard service."

The following day the regiment reached the ground on which the army
engaged in the arduous campaign of Nepaul, in the years 1815 and 1816,
had been directed to form. It was at a place called Ammowah, about
thirty-five miles from the great forest of Nepaul. At the back of this
forest were the strong forts and stockades of the enemy, on hills whose
summits were crowned with milk-white clouds, fringed with glittering
gold; and in the distance were to be seen the snowy mountains proudly
towering over the heads of the more humble hills below.

Considerable delay now occurred in the formation of the army, and time
began to hang heavy on our hands, although we had good hunting,
shooting, and racing, and did our best to amuse ourselves when off
active duty. But this was not the sort of sport for which we were
assembled in arms in this wild and romantic territory of the Nepaulese.
Our object was to reduce this artful and warlike tribe to subjection;
for our disasters the year before had made them bold and overbearing,
and had incited them to laugh to scorn all overtures of amicable
arrangement. They trusted, and not without good cause, to the almost
inaccessible nature of their country, and, from their tremendous
fortified hills and stockades, looked down with contempt on the little
foe below.

The necessary preliminaries to this arduous enterprise having been at
length duly arranged, things began to take a more active turn, and in
three days after we bent our way towards that forest that for ages past
had been the terror of the East, and was indeed a bulwark to the Nepaul
territory. Our march was necessarily slow and tedious; but in three days
we reached a place called Summarabassah, on the very margin of that
terrific forest. On the last day I was in the rear-guard, which did not
reach camp until late in the evening, although a distance of not more
than ten miles. The roads in which we marched might, with great
propriety, be termed bogs. They abounded with deep nullahs, or ravines,
with abrupt banks of a clayey nature. Our heavy guns we were compelled
to get over by means of men and drag-ropes, for the bullocks had no
footing, and many of these poor creatures were much hurt in the attempt
to perform this labour. After the camp was in sight, we were three hours
before we reached it. We had marched at about four o'clock in the
morning, without breakfast, expecting to reach our ground by nine, the
usual time, instead of which we did not get in until past four o'clock
in the afternoon, and then half famished.

We at last reached camp, in front of which, in a kind of inlet to the
forest, stood a large building, two stories high, forming a square. This
was built of stone, and tiled, and had only one entrance, which was a
small door. This security was, no doubt, to protect the inmates against
depredation, and from the nocturnal visits of savage animals. It was
supposed to have been the residence of the collector of the lowlands or
valleys. At this place we established a strong depôt, or principal post
of communication, where we could deposit cumbersome or superfluous
stores with safety. On the forest side we erected a strong breastwork or
stockade, with a wide and deep ditch, and embrasures for some guns--I
now forget the number--I think four.

The following day, Captain Gully, Lieutenants Masterson, Lee, Bowes,
and Ensign Shipp, must needs take a morning ride, and a peep into this
dark and dreary forest--the awe of man, and the haunt of beasts. We had
not gone far, when we saw several bears near a water-brook--no doubt for
the purpose of a morning swim, for the weather was warm. A little
further, we struck into a path, about a yard wide, which we all agreed
to explore. On each side of this path the underwood was thick and dark;
the trees were of an enormous and gigantic size; every hundred yards
were places where it was evident that fires had been kindled; and large
trees had been cut down, and were piled across the pathway, for the
prevention, beyond question, of intruders. We rode on till prudence
suggested the propriety of returning; but our curiosity was not yet
satisfied, so we mutually agreed to proceed about two miles further. At
last we came to a fire which was still burning. Here we called a
consultation, and at last again agreed to proceed about two miles
further. This distance brought us so close to the hills, that we could
discover men moving on them. About a mile further was the end of the
dark and frightful forest of Nepaul, which, the year before, had kept
five thousand men at bay. At the end was some open ground, with large
clumps of bamboo trees, and the open space pebbly. It was evident that
this space was covered with water during the monsoons. We still rode on
a little further, until at last we saw some men running across the road,
whereupon we unanimously agreed that it was high time to return, having
satisfied our curiosity to the full, and at the risk of our lives. We
were fearful that they might have observed us, and have dispatched a
detachment to cut off our retreat; and we now began to count our beads
of repentance; but the trial was to be made; so on we pushed, and
reached camp without molestation, thanking the auspicious stars that
were our safeguards. The distance we had ridden was about thirteen
miles, which, being doubled, made a pretty good morning's ride; add to
which, that during the excursion we had leapt over about a hundred
large trees. For this piece of palpable indiscretion, we were, as we
richly deserved, most severely admonished; but the information which we
had gained was truly acceptable, and we the following day commenced our
march, taking the road which we had so rashly explored, preceded by
pioneers, who soon cleared a way, and made a good carriage-road. We had
scarcely any stoppage, nor did we see a soul of the enemy. If small
stockades had been thrown across this narrow pathway, our loss of men
must have been great; but the supposed inaccessible nature of their
mountains made the enemy slumber in security. We soon got through the
avenue, and continued our march through the pebbly bed before alluded
to. About a mile ahead of this, a small plain opened to view, studded
with small bushes, at the extreme end of which the bed of the dry ravine
took a direction to the left. Here a most magnificent scene burst upon
the sight. The hills at this point represented a flight of stairs; one
reared its golden summit above the other in beautiful succession; the
whole of them were wooded with the most beautiful variegated trees and
shrubs; and, here and there, majestic rocks elevated their proud heads,
and seemed to bid defiance to the besieging enemy. At the foot or base
of these hills were posted two strong piquets of the enemy; one on a
hill to the right, in a house similar to the one described at
Summarabassah: but on our approach they flew into the hills in the
vicinity, without giving us a shot in earnest of being our enemy. This
silence on the part of a subtle and cunning foe informed us, in plain
terms, that something was brewing for us. They seemed to coax and invite
us to advance and view their picturesque country. It was necessary to
establish here a post of communication, through which we could obtain
supplies; for which purpose the house just spoken of was fortified, and
a depôt established. Here we waited until this post was well stored with
every requisite for war. During this time, the quarter-master-general's
department was busily employed in reconnoitring the surrounding
country; but, from the intricacy of its nature, but little information
could be obtained which we could on sure grounds act upon. At last,
after our patience was worn almost threadbare with this delay, it was
given out, as the firm opinion of the quarter-master-general (grounded
on unquestionable information from his trustworthy spies), that to force
an entrance at this point would be attended with the most disastrous
consequences. To risk a failure at the commencement of a war against
such a foe, would have been the basis of our ultimate defeat and
destruction; and it appeared, from information not to be doubted, that
in the direction which we had thought of taking, there were stockade
upon stockade, and fort upon fort. The attempt, therefore, to prosecute
our enterprise in this direction, under all these circumstances, could
be considered in no other light than wantonly knocking our heads against
the flinty rocks, or offering our shattered limbs as wadding for the
enemy's guns, or our bodies to fill up some deep vacuity in their new
and numerous stockades. We had more than fifty years' dear-bought
experience, and an officer seventy years of age for our guide. The young
and inexperienced officers, in the ardour of youth, felt mortified at
this information; and, had their will and feelings been consulted, they
would have madly rushed to their graves.

It was the opinion of the more calm-thinking and experienced men, that
if, after the information we possessed, we had proceeded in the same
track, and a failure had been the result, the whole dishonour of the
catastrophe would have fallen on the head of the commander, and have
been visited with the government's disapprobation and censure; but we
had at our head a soldier possessing every requisite for such a critical
campaign, and whose thoughts were now turned to some more practicable
part of the country. Every one was actively engaged in the attempt to
discover some new road, path, or ascent. Spies had now been absent two
days, and some apprehensions were entertained as to their safety,
knowing the barbarity of the Nepaulese; but on the evening of the third
day they returned; but not a syllable could be gleaned from the
quarter-master-general's department; every ear was on the listen to
catch the slightest hint, but all was silence and secrecy throughout the
camp. Rumours were flying about, and strange stories were circulated;
but the prevailing opinion was, that we must give up the campaign, on
account of an impossibility of access into the enemy's country. This was
a death-blow to our hopes. The attempt to force the entrance above
alluded to, would have been through the Chirecah Ghattie pass; but this
was wisely given up as hopeless. There was a small ravine branching off
from the bed of a dry river, in which our encampment lay, and its
entrance looked like the dreary access to some deep cavern. From thence
the spies last came. The moon rose in all her splendour, gilding the
tops of the golden-leaved trees; and all was silent, save the falling of
the distant cataract, when a faint whisper, borne on the refreshing
breeze of night, said, "Prepare to move;" and in one hour after, we
entered this little gaping cavern, leaving the principal part of our
force for the protection of our standing tents and baggage. We were
equipped as lightly as possible. Two six-pounders were conveyed on
elephants, and our march seemed to lie through the bed of this ravine,
which was rocky, and watered by a crystal current that rippled along its
flinty bed. We did not proceed at the rate of more than one or two
hundred yards an hour, ascending and descending every twenty paces; at
one time deep sunk in some dark excavation, and shortly afterwards
perched upon the summit of a rock, the falling of the numerous cataracts
drowning the noise made by our approach. The night was cold and chilly,
but as light as noonday; not a cloud was to be seen; the sky was one
sheet of beautiful blue; but in some of the excavations, where the
blessed moon never condescended to show her bright face, we were obliged
to go back to boyhood, and have a game of blind-man's-buff, for in
those places we were obliged to grope our way completely in the dark. In
these excavations the water was deep and cold; but even in these dreary
spots we experienced some pleasure, for occasionally, through little
fissures in the rock, we could espy the distant moonlit landscape, which
appeared as if viewed through a spy-glass, and was beautiful in the
extreme.

Had the enemy been aware of our nocturnal excursion, they might have
annihilated us, by rolling down rocks and stones upon our heads; but,
fortunately for us, they slumbered on the couch of fancied security, and
heard us not. What with falling and slipping, we became wet through; but
as I had that night the honour of bearing my country's banner, this was
a charge, the care of which afforded me neither time nor inclination to
attend either to personal annoyance or personal comfort. I felt that,
while it was untarnished, I should be proud and happy. My
covering-sergeant once had the assurance to ask me to permit him to
deprive me of the incumbrance. I really thought I should have jumped
down the fellow's throat. "An incumbrance!" I repeated; "how dare you
cast such an imputation on England's pride? No, sergeant: he who takes
this colour, when before an enemy, will take with it my life." "I beg
pardon, Sir; I did not intend to offend you, or cast a reflection on
that flag under which I have fought and bled." I replied, "No, sergeant,
I know you did not intend to offend me, or cast a stigma upon the
colour; but supposing that I should be so imprudent as to give up such a
charge to you, and you should lose it, or be killed, or meet with any
other accident, which in the course of war we are all liable to, what
answer should I make my justly-offended country, when asked, Where is
the banner which was intrusted to your charge? What excuse would it be
to say, I gave it to a sergeant to carry? Should I not deserve to be
carried to the gallows? No, sergeant, the post of ensign is one of most
distinguished trust, and, so long as I hold that commission, nothing
but death shall part me and my flag, while it is my duty to bear it;
but your offer was that of kindness. Come, let us drink to its
prosperity." Here I gave him my little pistol or brandy-bottle; and, in
the most prophetic manner, he said, "Well, Sir, God bless and prosper
our old banner; and, ere to-morrow's dawn, may you wave it over a
conquered foe." I took a drop, and said, "Amen." My young friend, who
had journeyed with me from Dinapore, and who was now my chum, had the
honour of carrying the other flag, and he also gloried in the
distinction; and although he had some twenty desperate falls, and
sprained his thumb, he would not part with it.

Our march now became more and more tardy, and the ascents and descents
more difficult and intricate. In some places rocks of gigantic size hung
some hundred feet over head. These sudden and tremendous hills and dales
indicated that we could not have far to go; for the last hill was
scarcely accessible. The soles of both my boots had long refused to bear
me company any further; but I had one faithful soul that bore me through
every difficulty and hardship.

The morn now began to break through the cerulean chambers of the east,
the faithful moon still lingering on the tops of the western hills, loth
to bid us farewell. I was of course in the centre of my regiment. We
halted a considerable time, till broad daylight, when we could see, from
where I stood, the soldiers in advance of us, ascending by means of
projecting rocks and boughs. We were halted in a kind of basin,
surrounded by high hills. In the course of a couple of hours, the whole
of the 87th regiment, with our gallant general and suite, ascended this
difficult ghaut. From this eminence we could see a great distance; and
on every hill we could discern signals, which were communicated from
post to post. From this we concluded that the enemy had gained
information of our approach; but I do not think they knew whereabouts we
were, as will appear afterwards, but merely that some of our troops had
marched from their old ground.

What will not good examples effect on the minds of soldiers? Our gallant
general walked every yard of this critical march, encouraging his men.
These well-timed examples will accomplish wonders. The question now was,
how to get the guns up, and the powder and shot; but those who are
accustomed to wars in India are not often at a loss for expedients.
Having got all the men up, except the rear-guard, the pioneers went to
work with their pickaxes, some making a road, and others felling trees.
As we were but two regiments, the general's primary object was to place
our little force to the best advantage. This accomplished, the guns were
our next object. Having cut a good deal of the most prominent part of
the hill away, and laid trees on the ascent as a footing for elephants,
these animals were made to approach it, which the first did with some
reluctance and fear. He looked up, shook his head, and, when forced by
his driver, he roared piteously. There can be no question, in my
opinion, that this sagacious animal was competent instinctively to judge
of the practicability of the artificial flight of steps thus
constructed; for the moment some little alteration had been made, he
seemed willing to approach. He then commenced his examination and
scrutiny, by pressing with his trunk the trees that had been thrown
across; and after this he put his fore leg on, with great caution,
raising the fore part of his body so as to throw its weight on the tree.
This done, he seemed satisfied as to its stability. The next step for
him to ascend by was a projecting rock, which we could not remove. Here
the same sagacious examination took place, the elephant keeping his flat
side close to the side of the bank, and leaning against it. The next
step was against a tree; but this, on the first pressure of his trunk,
he did not like. Here his driver made use of the most endearing
epithets, such as "Wonderful, my life"--"Well done, my dear"--"My
dove"--"My son"--"My wife;" but all these endearing appellations, of
which elephants are so fond, would not induce him to try again. Force
was at length resorted to, and the elephant roared terrifically, but
would not move. Something was then removed; he seemed satisfied, as
before; and he in time ascended that stupendous ghaut. On his reaching
the top, his delight was visible in a most eminent degree; he caressed
his keeper, and threw the dirt about in a most playful manner. Another
elephant, a much younger animal, was now to follow. He had watched the
ascent of the other with the most intense interest, making motions all
the while, as though he was assisting him by shouldering him up the
acclivity; such gestures as I have seen some men make when spectators of
gymnastic exercises. When he saw his comrade up, he evinced his pleasure
by giving a salute, something like the sound of a trumpet. When called
upon to take his turn, however, he seemed much alarmed, and would not
act at all without force. When he was two steps up, he slipped, but
recovered himself by digging his toes in the earth. With the exception
of this little accident, he ascended exceedingly well. When this
elephant was near the top, the other, who had already performed his
task, extended his trunk to the assistance of his brother in distress,
round which the younger animal entwined his, and thus reached the summit
of the ghaut in safety. Having both accomplished their task, their
greeting was as cordial as if they had been long separated from each
other, and had just escaped from some perilous achievement. They
mutually embraced each other, and stood face to face for a considerable
time, as if whispering congratulations. Their driver then made them
salaam to the general, who ordered them five rupees each for sweetmeats.
On this reward of their merit being ordered, they immediately returned
thanks by another salaam.

At the top of this ghaut we left five companies of native infantry to
protect our baggage, that must necessarily follow through this pass.
Pioneers were also left to cut down the hill, so that our large guns
might be dragged up by means of men. This arranged, we pushed on for
about a couple of miles. Our route lay through the bed of a river,
which was then dry, but which, from the enormous trees that had been
washed down its current, must be rapid and destructive during the
monsoons. I believe the whole distance we had accomplished did not
exceed five miles, and we had been upwards of sixteen hours on the move.
By the evening, the enemy had learnt of our being in their country with
a large force, with elephants, guns, &c., which so much alarmed them,
that they dared not so much as take a peep at us. They said that we were
not men, but devils, and that we must have descended from the skies.
Some set forth that we were seen soaring in the air in aerial cars,
drawn by elephants. Thus, their idolatrous superstition frightened them
out of their wits; and until some of them, more courageous than the
rest, had ventured and felt that we were men, they could not be
prevailed upon to return to their posts, nor would they ever believe
that we had ascended the ghaut; and, indeed, to view it even after the
hill had undergone such a metamorphosis, it was then almost beyond
credit that the whole army, with twenty-four pounders, should have been
got up.

Our next object was to keep firm possession of what we had attained with
so much difficulty; for which purpose a small hill was selected for the
general safety, on which we established outlying piquets. From hence we
could reconnoitre the surrounding neighbourhood; but we had scared the
foe far into the woods and hills. The beauteous sun, which had in mercy
dried our wet clothes, was now on the decline, but assumed such an awful
colour, that it looked like a blood-stained banner. It had, when this
idea came across my mind, half buried itself behind the highest hill
visible from our new and exalted situation. When the sun had wholly
retired behind the hills, the golden rays which lingered on the scene
rendered it truly magnificent and ravishing. The mountains in the
distance were so high, that their tops seemed to touch the clear blue
clouds, while those which exceeded the others in height seemed pushing
their smaller neighbours headlong, to crush the foe below.

When the sombre robe of eve began to spread itself over the beauteous
scene, fires were seen as far as the eye could reach. These were signals
of alarm, and we could not expect anything less than a desperate effort
to drive us down the ghaut again; for the prevention of which every
possible preparation was promptly made. We were cold, hungry, and
barefooted. There had been an order that every man should bring three
days' provisions; but, by some mistake, this order had been neglected to
be properly communicated, for it ought to have been verbally published
on the morning of the day we marched. The expectation of something to do
in the night made us forget the cold and hunger. An additional outlying
and advanced piquet was ordered, and I was the next for duty. This
piquet was thrown out about two hundred yards in front of the others--a
subaltern's piquet. The first line of piquets threw out a chain of
double sentinels, the extremities of which formed a link with those
thrown out from the hill above, forming one-eighth of a circle round the
general body. Mine was rather a piquet for reconnoitring, and, in case
of alarm, to join the first piquet behind me. It was now about twenty
hours since we had had anything to eat. I was therefore hungry, and,
consequently, in good watching order, for an Englishman is always
irritable and peevish when his belly is empty. Repose was quite out of
the question, for bedding we had none, except the earth. I could not
sleep myself, and I took care that my little piquet did not slumber on
their posts. Of water there was plenty, for a most lovely crystal brook
murmured close by; but we were quite cold enough without that. It grew
dark and lonely, fires being forbidden to those on piquet, while those
on the hill had enormous ones. Speaking beyond a whisper was also
forbidden. Thus posted, we fully expected to be attacked; for the enemy
was famous for night-work. I visited my sentinels every quarter of an
hour. I could always find them by their teeth chattering. I had
forbidden them from challenging me, as I gave them to understand I
should always whistle when I was going round, and thus the enemy would
stumble upon my little piquet, and we could, if overpowered, retreat to
a stronger. Thus things went on till the moon rose in all her eastern
splendour, which enlivened the scene considerably; for when she was
thoroughly roused from her slumbers, we could see a great distance. All
was hushed as the tomb, save the crackling faggot, and the distant
roaring of beasts of prey. All of a sudden, two of my sentinels bellowed
out so that the echo resounded again, "Who comes there? Who comes
there?" Bang! bang! went both their muskets, and, in an instant, my
whole piquet were on the spot; and the whole line were ferreted out of
their beds of dried leaves--guns loaded--matches lit; all was ready for
the conflict: when it was found that the alarm was occasioned by a bear
or tiger lurking close upon our post, and which, in all probability, if
not timely disturbed, would have walked off with one of our men. The
circumstance was explained to an aid-de-camp who had arrived, and all
was again quiet; and the two sentinels got finely roasted by their
comrades, who had been obliged to turn out from their hiding-places.
Naught now was heard, save some pathetic execrations on the disturbers
of the night, by some poor fellow who had lost his warm berth. Thus
passed the night. This was in the month of January, and a bitter night
it was.

The following morning it was truly laughable to see the men crawling
from a huge heap of dried leaves, like pigs out of their straw. Thus
enveloped, they had managed to keep themselves warm during the night.
Some companies' liquor and biscuit had arrived; and, a short time after
daylight, my men and myself had something to eat, in the delights of
which meal we forgot the cares of a soldier, smiled on the hardships
that were passed, and thought little of those to come. I had some tea,
which revived me much. I must confess I do love to be on duty on any
kind of service with the Irish. There is a promptness to obey, a
hilarity, a cheerful obedience, and willingness to act, which I have
rarely met with in any other body of men; but whether, in this
particular case, those qualifications had been instilled into them by
the rigid discipline of their corps, I know not, or whether these are
characteristics of the Irish nation; but I have also observed in that
corps (I mean the 87th regiment, or Prince's Own Irish) a degree of
liberality amongst the men I have never seen in any other corps--a
willingness to share their crust and drop on service with their
comrades, an indescribable cheerfulness in obliging and accommodating
each other, and an anxiety to serve each other, and to hide each other's
faults. In that corps there was a unity I have never seen in any other;
and as for fighting, they were very devils. During the Peninsular war,
some general officer observed to the Duke of Wellington, how unsteadily
that corps marched. The noble duke replied, "Yes, general, they do
indeed; but they fight like devils." So they always will while they are
Irish. In some situations they are, perhaps, too impetuous, but if I
know anything of the service, this is a fault on the right side; and,
what at the moment was thought rashness and madness, has gained Old
England many a glorious victory.

Our magical or aerial flight up the ghauts, with guns and elephants,
seemed to have bewildered the enemy, for we could not get a glimpse of
one of them; and it is not clear to me that they had not flown to their
capital, to see if some of us had alighted there, or that we were not
soaring in the air in that vicinity.

The sun rose in majestic splendour, and the scene before us was a little
world of woody hills and valleys. The brilliant rays of the luminary of
day exhibited to the eye nature's masterpiece in scenery. Golden woods,
that would have defied the pencil of an artist, and which surpassed the
sublimest creation of the imagination; glittering hills, that vied in
brilliancy with the rising sun; rippling rills, that whispered, "Come,
ye thirsty souls, and drink of the crystal brook; and, ye passing
seraphs, stay and dip your wings in the pure stream, ere ye ascend to
the realms of love;" lofty towering pines, that nodded, "Come and see
the things on high;" and cataracts, that rushed headlong down the rocky
cliff, and imparted a wild beauty to the whole, beyond the power of
words to describe. There sighed the weeping willows, which, by the cool
brookside, dipped their new-born leaves in the rippling waters, to steal
more tears that they might weep again. There sported the golden fish,
sheltering themselves from the meridian sun, beneath the shade of the
overhanging foliage. There grew the blushing rose, calmly reposing on
its downy moss, and smiling that it had, when fair maidens were asleep,
robbed their cheeks of all their beauty. There flourished the gaudy
tulip; and the blue-eyed violet dwelt on the mossy banks. The little
minstrels of the grove tuned their morning notes, and their seraphic
melody lulled the whole to sweet repose. Oh, that ever human blood
should defile these beauteous scenes! or that the horrors of war should
disturb the sweet harmony established by nature in the fertile valleys
of this sweet and picturesque country! But in this paradise of beauty
dwelt a cruel and barbarous people, proverbial for their bloody deeds,
whose hearts were more callous than the flinty rocks that reared their
majestic heads above their woody mountains. They are more savage in
their nature than the hungry tiger that prowls through their dreary
glens; cruel as the vulture; cold-hearted as their snowy mountains;
subtle and cunning as the fiend of night; powerful as the rocks on which
they live; and active as the goat upon the mountain's brow.

We were obliged to proceed with caution, and with our eyes open, step by
step. We had intended to have remained here the whole of this day, to
enable our supplies to come up; but these having arrived early we
commenced our march in continuation of the same bed of the river. We had
not been in motion an hour, before the enemy's fires were lighted, as
signals that we were again on the move. Our march was difficult, as we
were obliged to cut our way through underwood, and pass through several
rivers, which much impeded our progress. These streams are fed and
nourished from the tremendous cataracts from the high hills before us.
We found that the enemy had strictly watched our movements during the
night; for, every quarter of a mile we advanced, we found fires still
burning, and some earthen cooking-vessels in which they had boiled their
rice. Having proceeded about a mile, we came to a sudden and abrupt
turning in the river. Here we halted, and the light company was sent on
to reconnoitre. We then moved on again, and when we had rounded the
turning of the river, which swept round the bottom of a little hill, a
small plain opened to our view. It was fertile with a kind of yellow
grass, that perfumed the air with its odour, something like sandalwood.
This grass, we were informed afterwards, was a deadly poison. Here we
came to another halt, our spies having returned, and informed us that we
were not far from a very strong post of the enemy. This news flew
through the ranks like wildfire; the flints were adjusted--bayonets
firmly fixed on--cartridges arranged--and every eye beamed delight. I
did not much like my present situation, in the centre of the regiment;
it was not what I had been used to; but being one of the youngest
ensigns, I was obliged to comply. I thought it strange that the colours
should be in the centre, and would, if I had dared to make such a
proposition, have suggested that they might be moved to the front; but
my commanding officer, good and kind as he was, would, I am sure, have
rode me down for my impudence; so I contented myself by getting on the
toes of my lower extremities, and peeping over the men's heads to see
what was going on. The light company were busy all this time in
exploring and examining the localities on our right and left, that we
might not be hemmed in. This is a necessary precaution in a mountainous
country; for the enemy may open the door to you and bid you enter, and,
when well in, may shut you in, so as to leave you no possibility of
escape. Young officer, never be inveigled in this manner, but take care,
especial care, that you can always insure that last extremity--a good
retreat. My eyes lingered on the light bobs as they ascended the
surrounding hills, and I wished to be with them, to see what was to be
seen. This was a most critical campaign, and required more prudence and
caution than I ever possessed in the whole course of my life. In such a
country you could not tell but your next step might be in the cannon's
mouth. I was thus thinking, when I saw the adjutant running towards the
centre of the regiment, vociferating, "Pass the word for Mr. Shipp; pass
the word for Mr. Shipp."--"Holloa!" thought I, "what's all this about?".
At last he came up to me, and said I was to join the light company
immediately. This was making me a light bob, indeed. I made over the
colour to my covering sergeant, by the adjutant's desire; but at that
moment a thought struck me, that perhaps this was the last time I should
ever bear it; for I could not foresee but that that day--nay, that
fleeting hour--might be my last; so I pressed the colour to my bosom and
kissed it: why should I be ashamed of it? I was a soldier, and the oft
blood-stained banner was my pride.

I soon joined the light bobs, for I could run and jump with the best of
them, and the column now proceeded slowly. The fine light company of the
25th regiment of Bengal Native Infantry were with us, and there was the
greatest intimacy between this native company and ours, and more
familiarity and good-fellowship than I had ever witnessed during my
course of service in India. We now ascended a small hill, at the bottom
of which we saw several men running away. Our soldiers were not cruel,
nor did they ever wantonly throw away their fire. A soldier ought to
guard every round intrusted to his care, for the protection of his
country and himself, as the apple of his eye; many a brave man has lost
his life in battle for the want of a round of ammunition, which, in all
probability, he had been careless of at the beginning. It is not only a
crime, but a folly, for men to be wanton in this particular. I took
about ten men with me, and the acting adjutant followed, and we soon
came up with these poor frightened and bewildered creatures. They threw
themselves on the earth, but did not supplicate for mercy--a thing
unknown among themselves. They seemed rather to meet the pointed
bayonet, than to run or cringe from it; but, when they saw that we did
not lay on them the finger of harm, they kissed our feet and then the
earth, in token of gratitude. These poor creatures were not soldiers,
but poor, solitary, and oppressed villagers, that had been sent for
rice, of which they carry great loads, by a strap or belt over their
heads, in baskets made of the willow-twig. We were directed by our
general to let them go, that they might tell our enemies that we were
not bloodthirsty murderers. When this was communicated to them by one of
their countrymen, the eye of fear brightened up; we could see the tear
of joy in their eyes; they bowed, a hundred times in the most abject
prostrations to our feet; then stood towards their village, seemingly
dispossessed of any fear. I dare say these poor starving creatures would
willingly have sought protection under the shadow of our mercy, rather
than return to be the slaves of a tyrannic government.

We now came to a wider river with a rocky bed, and, a little higher up,
was the strong post before alluded to. We could see the ends of the
houses standing some thirty yards from the river, whose banks, at this
place, were high and abrupt. We therefore crossed a little lower down,
when the 87th light company was pushed on at a good round trot. Here was
a square building, something like what I have before described at
Summarabassah, but on a much larger and stronger scale. This we
surrounded and entered. About fifty men were in this place; but, on
seeing us enter, they ran out at an opposite door, but were met by the
European soldiers. Many of them escaped; the others, some of whom showed
fight, were killed. The house was empty, except that some unshelled
rice and saltpetre were strewn about it. On looking round, we discovered
another building of a similar nature, about three hundred yards further
in the wood, to which there was a narrow path. Into this we struck, and
expected every moment to be saluted with the contents of a cannister of
grape, or with a volley of musketry; for the building commanded this
road or pathway from two or three hundred loop-holes. In this building,
or, rather, near the door of it, lay a man dead, dreadfully mutilated.
We pushed in, and the few soldiers that occupied the house ran out into
the wood, which was close to this building, and thus escaped, with the
exception of about five or six, who were shot by some good marksmen.
This house was also empty, save that some little grain was scattered
about here and there. They did not, I should suppose, expect us to dinner,
although their cooking utensils, well filled, were boiling on the fire.
These we broke for fear of poison, a crime they were fully capable of.
On looking at the poor mutilated man, he was discovered to be one of our
spies, respecting whom our kind-hearted quarter-master-general had
expressed the most anxious solicitude. My expressions, in describing
these savages, may have been thought to have been too severe and
exaggerated, when I accused them of being barbarous and cruel; but the
reader shall now judge for himself whether or not this accusation was
unfounded.

In all nations, even in Europe, the practice of punishing spies is
recognized as just; but their execution is generally public, and not
without the sanction and approbation of the governor or
commander-in-chief; and no piquet, post, or guard, dare inflict the
penalty of death. This poor creature was seized, and literally cut to
pieces; and it was supposed, by the medical people, that he must have
died a death of extreme agony, for the ground under him was dug up with
his struggling under the torture which had been inflicted on him. His
arms had been cut off, about half way up from the elbow to the
shoulder; after which it appeared that two deep incisions had been cut
in his body, just above the hips, into which the two arms had been
thrust. His features were distorted in a most frightful manner. Our poor
fellows wept bitterly over the sight, and swore, in the bitterness of
their anger, that they would revenge this foul and bloody deed; and I
had great difficulty, with their gallant captain, in restraining them
from following those savages into the wood. The pioneers having arrived,
the poor wretch was committed to his last home, amidst the sympathy of
all around.

Ettoondah was the name of the place where this barbarous murder had been
committed; and a more lovely or more picturesque spot there is not in
the created world.

Here we had some tolerably good fishing, by tying our horse-blankets
together, and then dragging the stream. We remained here some days, for
the purpose of making this our grand depôt; for which purpose, in the
lower house, which was better situated than the other, and not so near
the wood, we built a large and strong stockade, with six embrasures for
guns. This house we converted into store-rooms, and here we left all our
superfluous baggage. I had no superfluities; one thing on and one off
was quite enough for any man on such a service, and I often regretted,
with many of my brother officers, that we had not brought packs, like
the men, which would have carried our all safely, and entirely relieved
us from the apprehension which we now felt of losing those things not
immediately in our presence.

The domestic fowls, kept by the natives, had strayed into the adjoining
woods, and there bred, and had become very numerous. At night they
roosted on the trees, without any apparent fear of molestation. Firing
was most strictly prohibited within a mile of camp; and justly so, or we
should, if permitted, have had the soldiers firing away their
ammunition, and the camp alarmed. Many of the fowls, however, were
caught and eaten.

[Illustration]




CHAPTER XIII.


In three or four days we again moved on. The 87th being the only
European corps with this part of the division, we always led the column,
or, rather, formed the advance-guard. We commenced our march; and,
rather wishing to see, instead of groping, our way, we went on through a
dense thick wood for a couple of miles, through which there was a
tolerably good road, so that our troops travelled with comparative
facility. When at the end of two miles, we came to a small open space,
where several fires were still alight and burning, and earthen pots left
behind. About the middle of this little plain was a river about
knee-deep. On the margin of the wood on the opposite side of this river,
several people were seen peeping through the green foliage, watching our
movements. We entered another thick wood, which brought us to the bank
of another river; but the road did not cross it, but went along the left
bank, under a small hill, from which it had apparently been cut by
manual labour. This was rather a dangerous place to enter. A high and
inaccessible hill was on one side, and a deep bank and river on the
other; and on the opposite side of the river, was a kind of rising bank,
behind which the enemy might be lying in ambush, and waiting till we had
got well in before they commenced firing. In this case their fire must
have been very destructive from both sides, without the possibility of
escape or defence, and the confusion would have been dreadful. But
Major-General Sir David Ochterlony was not to be entrapped in that
manner; these points were scrupulously explored before we attempted to
enter such a place of insecurity.

At the end of this winding road, there opened to the view an extensive
valley, and, here and there, small straggling villages, consisting of
some ten or more huts; but very few people could be seen, and those few
were poor villagers. We continued our march for about half a mile
further, when we saw on our left an extensive village, and, on the hills
immediately in its rear, an immense number of people, seemingly
soldiers; for we could see spears, colours, &c. We immediately bent our
way towards this village, as we saw numerous people running to and fro.
When near, we got into double-quick time, and then separated into files,
with our pieces loaded. I went into several huts, where nothing but a
set of poor decrepit old people could be seen. About twenty or thirty
yards further, I saw a two-story brick house, probably the Zemindar's,
for there was no other. Here I saw several good-looking and well-dressed
men run in and shut the door. I broke it open, with the assistance of
some of my men. When I entered the lower floor, I found there were
several men there. One was sitting; but, having gone from the light, and
a bright sun, into comparative darkness, I could scarcely see. I was
therefore obliged to prick my way with my old 24th dragoon sabre; and I
just recovered my vision in time to see a man aiming an arrow at me. I
struck at the arrow, which was close to me; but, from the indistinct
light, I could not make sure of my aim. He let fly, and the arrow could
not have been more than a hair-breadth from the side of my head. It
stuck in the door-post, when a soldier of the company, by name Quanbury,
stopped his shooting, by shooting him, for firing at his officer. The
others begged for mercy, which was willingly granted. Never did I see a
man in the 87th regiment wantonly commit an act of cruelty. We took them
prisoners, but they were ultimately discharged, and permitted to return
to their villages or homes.

A little further on we came in sight of Muckwanpore Valley, and an
immense long line of huts. These, we afterwards were given to
understand, were the summer quarters of the enemy's soldiers. On our
left ran a ridge of hills, covered with variegated shrubs and trees. On
this range of hills we could see soldiers posted in immense force, but
they attempted not to molest our line of march, although sometimes, I am
sure, within shot of their ginjalls. They seemed rather to be on the
defensive than the offensive, as we should have imagined. Various were
the opinions as to their apparent indifference to our running all over
the country. From these huts, or military cantonments, we could see the
fort of Muckwanpore, and innumerable large stockades on the hill in the
rear of the one immediately in front of the before-mentioned huts. The
fort appeared some miles off, and looked like a speck in the sky; but,
no doubt, the approaches to it, protected as it was by the stockades,
which we could see with the spy-glass, were extremely perilous. We
encamped in the lines which had been left by the enemy, and could not
have been more than one mile and a half from the summit of this hill.
However, they still continued passive, sitting upon their legs, watching
our movements. Our position was secure and strong, being on two sides
surrounded with a deep nullah, with a nice rippling stream.

The following morning was occupied in looking about our new encampment,
and seeing what was in the adjoining woods. We found nothing but a few
partridges and woodcocks, and these we could not shoot, being too near
camp. About a mile behind the camp the whole scenery around was truly
romantic, from the white and craggy rocks, apparently living in the
clouds, behind which not a tree or a shrub was to be seen. These could
only be seen night and morning, or when the sky was clear; at other
times, these hills could not be discovered through the clouds. The fort
itself seemed high, and almost beyond the power of mortal ascent. For
the first time these ten nights I obtained some sleep, having no charge,
and no care on my mind. Sleeping in my clothes was no inconvenience to
me. I slept soundly till the broad daylight broke in through the
crevices of the tent. I rose in the morning sprightly as a lark, and
indulged myself with dry and clean linen, which was quite a treat. I
felt so refreshed, that I was quite another being from the day before,
and fit for anything. I took a stroll round my brother-officers' tents;
paid my devoirs to my commanding-officer, which I never failed to do
once a day, as a duty, and a respect due to his rank. I was invited to
breakfast with him; after which, as we were standing looking at the
hill, we were not a little surprised to find that the strong piquet of
the enemy, which was posted there the night before, was not to be seen.
Two of our men were brought before the commanding-officer for having
gone beyond the outlying piquet. The fact was, that these imprudent
fellows had been upon the hill, where the piquet had been, unarmed.
After admonishing them for their imprudence and disobedience of orders,
the commanding-officer asked one of them what he saw; he replied,
"Nothing at all, your honour, but a great big piquet; and sure they were
not there, but all gone." He added, that "all their fires were alight,
because he saw them burning."

"And what did you see on the other side of this first hill?" asked the
colonel, trying to smother a laugh.

"Nothing at all, your honour."

"Are there hills or valleys on the other side?"

"Neither, your honour; only a mighty big mountain, as big as the Hill of
Howth."

"Did you see any men?"

"Divel a one, your honour, except one poor old woman in one of the huts,
and she was after going when she saw me and Pat Logan coming near her."

"What took you there?"

"Fait! we both went to take a big walk, for we were quite tired doing
nothing--that's all, your honour; so I hope no offence."

"Fall in, the light company!"--"Light company, fall in!" was bellowed
through the whole line of encampment. The colonel flew to the right--the
adjutant to the left; I ran one way, and the two men jumped another, for
they both belonged to the light company. Scarcely had I reached the
parade, when three parts of the company were under arms, with our noble
general at the head, getting men together. It was five minutes only from
the first order when we marched off, not a man absent. We soon found, by
the direction we took, that the taking of the hill was to be our object.
We moved on slowly, for it was a good half mile up the hill, and the
ascent winding and steep. Our lads seemed as merry as crickets. In five
minutes after, we heard firing on the top of the hill to our right. This
proceeded from a small reconnoitring party that had a short period
before gone up, under Lieutenant Lee, of the 87th regiment, and
Lieutenant Turrell, of the 20th native infantry, a brave young
volunteer, who fell an early victim to his zeal. The design with which
this reconnoitring party had been dispatched up the hill, was to protect
the quarter-master-general in the execution of the duties incident to
his department. This party being observed from the fort of Muckwanpore,
which overlooked the ground on which they were reconnoitring, a large
body of the enemy, who had, without orders, vacated the post immediately
in front of our encampment, were dispatched to re-occupy the position
which they had deserted, and in their advance they fell in with our
reconnoitring party, who, as they were not in all above twenty men, were
of course obliged to make a precipitate retreat. In this disastrous
skirmish, poor Lieutenant Turrell was cut to pieces, and several others
of the party killed and wounded. As the party which had been thus
surprised was making the best of their way down the hill, we made the
best of our way up. We were supported by our old friends, the light
company of the 25th native infantry. The ascent was most difficult,
there being only one narrow pathway, by which we were obliged to ascend
almost one by one. When about half way, or three parts up, we came to a
small flat spot, about fifty yards long, and twenty wide. Here our noble
captain sounded the _assemblée_. We could now see the enemy, like ants,
creeping and lurking about, and busily engaged in secreting themselves
behind trees and stones. I presumed to recommend to the captain of the
light company, that our forming in a body would bring on us a
destructive fire, and that we had better fight them on their own system,
which was extending, and every man availing himself of tree or stone,
and a rest for his piece. This was sure to be attended with success;
and, however brave a man may be, he never ought to be above advice. Our
captain readily saw the danger that would attend our forming, and
therefore immediately sounded the extend; then the advance; and the
fighting soon became warm on both sides. The enemy maintained their
ground and fought manfully. I hate a runaway foe; you have no credit for
beating them. Those we were now dealing with were no flinchers; but, on
the contrary, I never saw more steadiness or more bravery exhibited by
any set of men in my life. Run they would not; and of death they seemed
to have no fear, though their comrades were falling thick around them,
for we were so near that every shot told. At last some of their men
began to give way; and, as we were ascending rapidly, their commander,
or one of their principal officers, attempted to rally them. Having
succeeded in this attempt for the moment, the said officer had the
impudence to attack and put his majesty's liege subject, John Shipp,
ensign on full pay, and in the full vigour of his life and manhood, in
bodily fear, on the king's high hill of Muckwanpore, on the afternoon of
---- I now forget the date, he so frightened me. He was a strong,
powerful man, protected by two shields, one tied round his waist, and
hanging over his thighs as low as his knees, and the other on the left
arm, much larger than the one round his waist. From this gentleman there
was no escape; and, fortunately for me, I had my old twenty-fourther
with me, which I had two or three days before put in good shaving order.
With this I was obliged to act on the defensive, till I could catch my
formidable opponent off his guard. He cut, I guarded; he thrust, I
parried; until he became aggravated, and set to work with that
impetuosity and determination pretty generally understood by the phrase
"hammer and tongs;" in the course of which he nearly cut my poor
twenty-fourther in pieces. At last I found he was winded; but I could
see nothing of the fellow, except his black face peeping above one
shield, and his feet under the other; so I thought I would give him a
cut five across his lower extremities; but he would not stand still a
moment; he cut as many capers as a French dancing-master, till I was
quite out of patience with his folly. I did not like to quit my man; so
I tried his other extremities; but he would not stand still, all I could
do. At length, I made a feint at his toes, to cut them; down went his
shield from his face, to save his legs; up went the edge of my sword
smack under his chin; in endeavouring to get away from which, he threw
his head back, which nearly tumbled off, and down he fell; and I assure
you, reader, I was not sorry for it, for he was a most unsociable
neighbour. I don't know whether I had a right or not, but I took the
liberty of taking his sword, gold crescent, turban-chain, and large
shield. The latter I sported on my left arm during the action, and it
was fortunate for me that I did, for I found that the shield was
ball-proof, and I should have been severely wounded, had I been deprived
of this trophy. Our gallant captain fought like one of the old Fogs, and
his men, as I had been told, were indeed "divels to fight." The very
noise they made would have frightened old Harry himself.

The enemy fought furiously before they gave up the hill; indeed, many
of them rushed upon our bayonets in the most reckless and desperate
manner. Being at last compelled to give way, they took up their station
on the adjoining hills, and in the ravines and valleys below, and their
fire for a time was destructive. As we had now gained the hill, we had
proceeded to the extent of our orders. Here reinforcements poured up to
our assistance, and two six-pounders, which had been sent up immediately
after us, now began to play with grape on the poor and brave fellows who
had sought refuge in the dells below. The havoc was dreadful, for they
still scorned to fly. During our ascent, some shells had been thrown by
our artillery below, from some howitzers in front of our encampment, to
the right of the ridge of the hill, where the enemy, in immense force,
had been observed running down to the assistance of their beaten
comrades. This reinforcement of the enemy brought down, to play upon our
ascent, a small hill-gun, a three-pounder of about a yard long, which
one man could carry. The whole of the ammunition brought by the enemy
for this and other purposes, our shells from below reached and blew up,
and great numbers were killed and wounded by the explosion. When their
ammunition was gone, they rolled the little gun down the hill, where we,
after the action, found it. Our troops having been distributed and
posted along the range of hills, some of our men were killed and wounded
by each other, by their cross-firing at random, where they heard the
sound of muskets, but could not see the object. We frequently sounded
"cease firing," but to no purpose; and, indeed, it was truly tantalizing
to see thousands of the enemy under our very noses, and not to be
allowed to fire at them; but, the woods being thick and high, we were
fearful of again drawing on ourselves the fire of our men on the
opposite hills. Our brave colonel had arrived upon the hill with the
reinforcements which belonged to his brigade, and, fearing the same evil
he sounded repeatedly the "cease firing;" but here and there some shots
were still fired by the native troops. When he came to his light
company, I could see the beam of delight in the veteran's eye; but that
was no time for compliments. He desired us to cut the first man down who
presumed to disobey his oft-repeated order of "cease firing;" and he
told us to lie down, and on no account to attempt to proceed. At this
moment, one of the enemy, who had been annoying us from a thicket some
thirty paces from where I stood, not stomaching the grape, made a
movement from his hiding-place. One of our company seeing so good an
opportunity, was not to be restrained; he fired, and killed his man. The
colonel had nothing but a walking-stick in his hand. Whether he thought
it was his sword or not, I cannot say; but he immediately ran at the man
and struck him across the nose--in which, by-the-by, nature had been
very bountiful to this individual--exclaiming at the same time, "You
rascal! I have a great mind to have you shot this moment for this
pointed disobedience of my orders." At this moment, seeing the enemy,
who had secreted themselves in the underwood, ferreted out by our
shells, and running off, some of our fellows must, if they died for it,
have a shot. This exasperated our little colonel beyond bounds. He was a
little lion when roused. He immediately selected one of the men of the
light company of the 25th regiment, and ordered him to be shot, which
would certainly have been done, had not the adjutant-general of the
forces at that time joined the colonel with orders. By this the
colonel's attention was drawn off, and he ran off towards the right. The
man, seeing this, ran towards the left, and thus escaped the punishment
he justly deserved. Prompt and implicit obedience is one of the grand
principles of military discipline; and any officer would have been
justifiable in shooting, or cutting down, any such disobedient soldier.
Any breach of orders I would at all times punish with a great and heavy
penalty. Encourage this, and there is an end to military obedience and
discipline at once. The soldier who was struck on this occasion was
sensible of the enormity of his crime, and therefore quietly pocketed
the more lenient penalty, and the countermarch his nose had made towards
his cheek, and thought himself fortunate that he had not been deprived
of his life.

Naught was now heard but the roaring of the two six-pounders and the
whistling of shells. The dying and the wounded lay in masses in the
dells and ravines below. In our own company we had, I think, eleven
killed and twenty wounded, our total number being eighty only. I do
repeat again, I never saw such soldiers. I began to think myself, in
comparison with them, but yet a novice. When the evening began to spread
her mantle over the dreary scene, the sombre appearance of the lowering
sky seemed to mourn, and put on a garb of black, to shield from human
eye the ghastly sight below. As long as it was light, we could plainly
see the last struggles of the dying. Some poor fellows could be seen
raising their knees up to their chins, and then flinging them down with
all their might. Some attempted to rise, but failed in the attempt. One
poor fellow I saw get on his legs, put his hand to his bleeding head,
then fall, and roll down the hill, to rise no more. This was the scene
that the evening now closed upon. Reader, believe me when I assure you
that these results of war were no sights of exultation or triumph to the
soldiers who witnessed them. Willingly would we one and all have
extended the hand of aid to them, and dressed their gaping wounds. No
brave man will ever exult over a bleeding and wounded enemy. The weapon
of destruction is no sooner out of his hands, than he is our prisoner,
but not our foe. The sympathetic expressions that fell from the lips of
our brave soldiers, on witnessing these sights, would have done credit
to any set of men.

The dark clouds omened a coming storm. I have been told that any
particular noise in mountainous countries--more particularly the
roaring of cannon--will bring the clouds down from above, and that rain
will follow; and I once heard a gentleman account for it in this way. He
said that all dark and thick-looking clouds might be said to be
reservoirs of water; that any convulsion would bring them down; and
that, when at a certain distance from the earth, the earth's attractive
power would draw the rain from them, and, when lightened of this burden,
the clouds would again rise. How far this may be the case, I know not. I
can only say that, if convulsion could cause rain, there was convulsion
enough, for the roaring of the cannon kept up one continued re-echo. The
evening closed in pitchy darkness.

The pioneers had been sent up, and we commenced intrenching and
stockading the hill round the huts, which were in number about twenty.
Some refreshments had at this time come up, both for officers and men.
After partaking of some food, it was resolved between my captain and me,
that we should watch four hours round, and that he should commence the
first four. He accordingly went to post his men, and I took possession,
with several men, of a small hut full of good straw, on which I lay down
to repose. Scarcely had I closed my eyes in balmy sleep, when I heard
the unwelcome vociferation, "Pass the word for Lieutenant Shipp; pass
the word for Mr. Shipp; send Mr. Shipp to me." It was the colonel's
voice that I heard; so, jumping from my straw, I exclaimed, "Here I am,
colonel; here am I, Sir."--"That's right," said the colonel; "I want you
to go on duty." He then took me by the hand, and said, "Shipp, you have
verified the recommendations I received from your late commanding
officer of the 24th Light Dragoons, and I shall not lose sight of your
conduct. From the information our spies have brought, we have every
reason to believe that the enemy will, under the darkness of the night,
make an effort to regain their lost post, which is of much consequence
to them, and more to us. We must therefore prepare to meet them with
determined force and resistance, or we shall have all our work to do
over again. You must take a steady sergeant and twelve men, and proceed
down close to the reservoir of water. On this side of the reservoir take
up your station. Let your sentinels form a link with the other sentinels
on your right and left; and by no means permit your men to lie down or
sleep, but see that they watch, and are on the alert. Go; I know I need
not explain more to you. Your captain I have posted in a similar
situation." The rain now fell in torrents; the thunder rolled in its
bitterest anger; and the lightning shot in massive sheets along the
mountain-tops, and, by its vivid blaze, showed us a glimpse of the dead
and the dying. I found that, close to my post, lay numbers whom I
believed dead; but I afterwards distinctly heard, during the cessation
of the thunder, the moaning of those below. I don't know any situation
more painful than mine was at that moment: a tempest raging in all its
terrific forms, surrounded by the dead and the dying, and expecting
every moment to be attacked by a cruel and barbarous foe, from whom no
mercy could be expected, should fate throw us into their hands. Nothing
but a sense of duty, and the recollection that I was engaged in the
service of my country, could have supported me under such circumstances.
A high sense of the duties, and an ardent attachment to the profession
of a soldier, will enable a man to do that, with comparative
cheerfulness, from which, under other circumstances, his feelings would
revolt. The enemy were noted for barbarity and craft, and the danger of
surprise was great.

Upon the principle that all stratagems are justifiable in warfare as
well as in love, a ready excuse may be found for the craft and cunning
exercised by this or any other tribe in their own defence; and it is
impossible to look even upon the cruelties practised by them, with any
other than an eye of pity and commiseration. They are taught from their
infancy the art of war; they fight under the banner of gloomy
superstition; cruelty is their creed; and murder of their foes the
zenith of their glory. Let us not, therefore, condemn too severely
these untaught babes of idolatry.

Notwithstanding my dismal forebodings, and the dangerous position which
we occupied, the night passed off quietly enough. Towards morning the
rain ceased, and the sun rose in all its splendour and majesty; but the
scene of death below marred and defiled the more distant prospect, which
was magnificent beyond description. The piquets from below were
withdrawn after daylight. On going round the hill afterwards, the dead
bodies there astonished me. It was scarcely possible to walk without
stepping on them. I could not have imagined that the one-twentieth part
had fallen; but, as I have before said, self, in action, is the grand
and primary object of man's regard. I paid a visit to the dead body of
my antagonist of the preceding day. I found that his head hung only by
the skin of his neck. He had also a cut in the abdomen, through which
the bowels protruded. I found that, in addition to this, he had received
a ball in the fleshy part of the thigh; but whether he got this before
or after the fall, I do not pretend to say, but I should imagine before,
from the direction of the ball. He was a fine-looking man, and was
dressed in a full general's uniform, the same as that worn by our
English generals twenty years ago, with the old frog lace, both on the
skirts and sleeves, but without epaulettes. When engaged with him, I
never dared take my eye off his. Had I not been thoroughly practised in
the sword exercise, I must soon have fallen, for he was a very expert
swordsman. In a letter addressed to me afterwards, by Captain
Pickersgill, quarter-master-general of the army, I was congratulated on
the fall of that distinguished _sobah_, or chieftain. His name, the
quarter-master-general stated, was Khissna Rhannah Bahadur, and that he
was the identical officer who had planned and executed the massacre at
Summanpore and Persah, the season before. The letter went on to state
that he was a great loss to the Nepaul government, and it was the
opinion of the quarter-master-general, as well as of Sir David
Ochterlony, that the death of this sobah contributed greatly to turn the
current of affairs in the Nepaul campaign.

Our next object was to commit the poor fellows who were killed to the
grave; for which purpose an enormous working-party was employed to bury
the dead, and take the wounded to our hospitals. In two days, eleven
hundred were committed to the grave, having almost one general tomb; and
it would have much edified those babblers who rail so much against
soldiers' cruelties and vices, to have seen the tear of compassion
trickling down the cheeks of both natives and Europeans on this
occasion. Having performed our sad duty, we were relieved at mid-day,
and returned to the lines, amidst the greetings of our comrades at the
foot of the hill. The orders of the day were flattering and
complimentary to all engaged. These were little trophies gained that no
man could rob or cheat us of. Having washed and dressed myself, I went
to the hospital to visit both my friends and those that had been, a
short day before, my mortal enemies. It had been a considerable time
before our wounded men could be removed from the hill, and then the
bringing them down so shook them, that, in many cases, inflammation had
taken place. Some of these poor suffering fellows seemed to endure the
most excruciating pangs. Every comfort that liberality could purchase
was afforded to the sufferers, and it gladdened my heart when I went
into the tents of the wounded of the enemy, to see some of our native
soldiers on their knees, waiting on and administering comforts to them,
while others were whispering sweet words of consolation into their
attentive ears, which were the more necessary, as some of these poor
creatures had an idea that their lives were only prolonged for a more
cruel and lingering death. An amputation had been thought necessary on
the leg of one of the native enemy. This he submitted to almost without
a struggle. When his leg was off, and the stump dressed, it confirmed
him in what he had been taught from his infancy, that almost all white
men were cannibals; and he asked one of his friends who was lying by
him (one of his countrymen), "when he thought they would take the other
leg off; as, if he thought it would be long, he would destroy himself."
This being understood by one of the hospital attendants, to ease his
mind, it was thought proper to explain to him that the act was one of
kindness, not of cruelty, and done to save his life. For this purpose
one of his countrymen, a spy of ours, was sent for; nothing, however,
but the sight of the same operation performed on one of our native men,
could appease and satisfy him. After having witnessed this, he became
calm, and felt satisfied that we were not such barbarians as he had been
taught to suppose. Our humane general had directed that men of the same
caste should attend the wounded prisoners of war, and volunteers in
abundance came forward for this benevolent purpose. It was a truly
pleasurable and delightful sight to witness those who, but a short day
before, had fought hard in the bitterest rancour of their souls, now
interchanging the most affectionate civilities.

I have, in the hurry of my narrative, forgotten a circumstance which
reflects honour on the soldier whom it concerns. When on the top of the
hill where the action raged most, one of the enemy showed himself most
conspicuously, fighting like a hero. He had just shot one of our men
close by where I stood, when I made towards him, with a man of the name
of Quanbury. Finding that he was receding from us, and again loading,
the soldier next me fired, and the man fell upon his knees. Quanbury
immediately ran up to him--for he still grasped his firelock--and was in
the act of running him through, when the man threw down his arms. Seeing
this, the brave Irish soldier stayed his finishing blow, exclaiming, "By
the powers, my fine fellow, but it was well you were after doing that
self-same thing; for had you shot me as you did that other man, bad luck
to me if I wouldn't have blown your brains out; so I would." Here the
quarter-master-general came up and took charge of his prisoner, and we
passed on to clear the hill of others who were keeping up a heavy fire.


[Illustration]




CHAPTER XIV.


We were still obliged to carry on our approaches with all possible
vigilance and activity; and our discipline was not relaxed in the
slightest particular. We were compelled to watch the enemy with a
jealous eye, not allowing our late little victory to feed our vanity, or
to seduce us from our wonted caution. Every eye was now fixed on the
hill which was in front of our head approach; and various and ludicrous
were the reports and opinions, during the day and night, of the
movements on the said hill. Fallen trees were magnified into guns and
mortars; variegated bushes into soldiers; the light between the trees
into flags; and the midnight _ignis fatuus_, on its nocturnal rambles,
into torches and lights of the enemy. The rustling leaves, falling down
the wintry glen, were construed into the coming foe; and, had one of our
captains been the commander-in-chief, the hill would have been treeless
and leafless, for he would have blown them all up instead of the enemy.
The glass was never from this gentleman's eye. Could his thoughts and
speculations by day and night have been committed to paper, his words
would have shone forth in all the radiance of a military vocabulary.
What shells would he not have expended upon the poor _ignis fatuus_! All
we could do or say, he would not believe us. If he had been our general,
we should have been in Khatmandoo, the capital of Nepaul, in half the
time. His system was new and wonderful; for, when arguing on the best
plan to be adopted, he had always the most happy knack of catching the
enemy asleep. But in these notions he happened to have mistaken his men.
The Nepaulese soldiers never sleep, or rather, such is their
watchfulness, that you can never surprise them. This misconception of
their character would have led him wrong as often as the _ignis fatuus_.
It is quite preposterous to hear some men boasting of what they would do
if they had the command. Soldiers are not to judge of the actions of
their superiors, but implicitly to obey any orders that may be
communicated to them. It is certain, at least, we have no right to
promulgate our opinions to the prejudice of others. I longed for an
opportunity of seeing this kill-devil of a captain well tried as a
soldier; for, if he killed people as fast by the sword as he did by the
tongue, two companies of such men would clear the universe, asleep or
awake. However, I never had my wish gratified in this respect, though I
do not despair that I may hear of some of his brilliant exploits when he
is general; for his merits surely cannot be long before it reach the
throne.

While we were parading the company in the evening, the captain observed
a man looking extremely ill, and asked him what was the matter with him.
"Nothing at all, your honour, only a little scratch one of them
spalpeens gave me on the hill yesterday; but, sure, it's nothing worth
while talking about." As the surgeon was standing near the parade, he
was sent for, and the man went into a tent to show his scratch, as he
called it, when it was found that the ball had carried away the point of
his lower rib, and the wound having been neglected, the surgeon
expressed some doubts as to whether the ball was still in or not; when
the soldier replied, "I beg your pardon, that's a great big mistake, for
here it is" (pulling it out of his pocket), "beat as flat as a
crown-piece." He was then ordered to the hospital, but was almost
obliged to be dragged there, for he bellowed out, "Arrah, captain,
honey, are you going to send me to the hospital before I get
satisfaction and revenge for this wound?" He was, of course, obliged to
go, and he got better; but during the campaign against the Nepaulese, he
never had the satisfaction he required.

The following day I went on outlying piquet, on a small hill about half
a mile from the right of the camp. This was, strictly speaking, a piquet
or post of observation, as, immediately behind it, was a small foot
pathway from the hill, which our advanced post had not yet reached. It
was, therefore, requisite to guard the mouth of this little pathway with
great care.

I believe it was when on this service that I had occasion to notice an
instance of sagacity in a dog, that may be deemed worthy of being
recorded.

In passing the sentinels, I found it necessary to admonish one of them
for not challenging in a louder voice. To my astonishment, the excuse
which the man made was, that he was afraid of waking a faithful dog of
his, which was asleep under a bush just by.

"What!" said I, "then I suppose you sometimes take nap about with this
faithful animal."

"Why, yes," said the man, innocently, "sometimes, sir; and, to say the
truth, I have but five minutes ago relieved him from his post."

"Very candid, truly," said I; "but are you not aware, my good fellow,
that you could be shot for sleeping on your post?"

The sentinel admitted that he knew well the consequences to which he
would be subjected by so doing; but notwithstanding this, he asserted
that he could thoroughly confide in his faithful companion, who, on the
slightest noise, would jump upon him, and awake him.

On further inquiry, I learnt that this sagacious and faithful creature
would regularly, when his master was on watch, stand his hour and walk
his round; that, in very dark nights, he would even put his ear to the
ground, and listen; and that, during the period assigned to him as his
turn to watch, he would never venture to lie down, but would steadily
and slowly walk his round, which nothing could induce him to leave, such
was his opinion of the nature and responsibility of his post. The man
added, that he once gave him to an officer of the Company's service, who
took him from the station where he was (Meerut) to Loodiana, a distance
of four hundred miles, and that, the moment the officer let him loose,
he returned to his old master, having performed that great distance in
two days and a half; that he was on the main-guard the night he
returned, and he was awoke by the dog licking his face. It appeared that
he had been through the barrack, and visited every sleeping soldier on
their separate cots, until he found his master. The man related several
anecdotes of this animal: among the rest, he said he was one day out
drinking toddy, some miles from camp, and from the intoxicating effect,
and the extreme heat of the weather, he went to sleep. On awaking, he
found his clothes torn in several places, and that he had been dragged
more than three yards from the bush under which he had lain down; but
what was his astonishment, on getting up, to find a large snake almost
torn to pieces, no doubt by his faithful guard! He was a powerful dog--a
kind of Persian hill greyhound--that would kill a wolf single-handed.

On the following day we opened our batteries on some stockades on the
face of the hill intervening between us and the fort of Muckwanpore. The
first stockade that we proposed to dislodge, was one about eight hundred
or a thousand yards from our battery. We could not approach nearer than
this, as a deep and enormous declivity lay between us. This being the
case, we were under the necessity of commencing at this great distance.
The stockade seemed alive with men. There was also a tent pitched in it,
with several colours flying, in token of defiance. Some dozen shells,
which were beautifully thrown into this stockade, put some of them to
double-quick; the tent soon disappeared, as well as the colours, and
most of the men, save now and then one or two taking a sly peep to see
what we were about. The eighteen and twenty-four pound balls, however, I
am convinced never had power to penetrate that little edifice of art. It
was evidently built of green bamboos. These, when green, are very
elastic, and, being interwoven, as this stockade seemed to be, there is
no question that, at the distance from which we fired, they would resist
the power of our balls. We frequently saw men running and picking up
something, a hundred yards or more from the place. We could not suppose
that they were picking up stones.

In the course of this day we received a communication to admit into camp
a native from the fort, with his attendants, six in number. "Halloa,"
said one, "what! they have had a sickener, have they?"--"They have had
enough on't," said another. A soldier standing near me bellowed out,
"Arrah, Corporal Freeman, dear, sure the enemy have got the Corporal
Forbes" (meaning the cholera morbus), "for the rajah is coming to take
_ta_ with Sir David Maloney." This was what our men had christened him,
I suppose to make his name shorter. Various were the reports in
circulation, and every one had his own opinion. Here again the glass of
the noble captain, of whom I have already made honourable mention, was
constantly at his eye, looking for this messenger of peace. Sometimes he
saw him on horseback; then in his palanquin, attended by one hundred
followers. "If he was the commander-in-chief, he would not permit one of
them to come within a mile of the camp, armed." One time he saw the
rajah riding on a milk-white steed on the hill; but this procession,
unfortunately, proved to be no other than little white clouds riding in
the sky. Ten thousand were the methods and styles in which this
messenger was to make his appearance, and not one was right, for he
arrived carried in something like a sailor's hammock, with one follower.
He was a dirty, ill-looking, thick-set fellow, with small eyes, wide
face, and a low forehead. In spite of these disadvantages of person,
however, he assumed all the consequence of a nabob; but when we
commenced examining his hammock and person, to see that he had no hidden
weapon, his ambassadorship was highly offended, and protested that, to
use his own words, "He would not permit his holy person (for he was a
priest) to be polluted or defiled by the contaminating touch of a
Christian." He added, "that he was a high-priest, and that, rather than
submit to such debasement, he would return to his rajah, and inform him
of the prodigious indign scrutiny of his holy person." He was soon
informed, that if he did not submit to the required forms and rules of
the East, he of course might return to his master, and tell him what he
pleased. He was getting into his hammock for this purpose, when his
holiness thought better of it, and said, "Well, you may examine." While
I searched his ponderous cumerbund (a long cloth that was round his
waist) he endeavoured to avoid my touch, by cringing from me, as he
would from the bite of a serpent; but I gave his holiness such a twist
round, that he thought he would never have stopped. Upon this his eye
darted vivid flashes of fire; I saw him clench his fists with rage; he
foamed from the sides of his mouth; and at one time I really thought
that the holy personage was about to forget his holiness, and coming to
the scratch. Having no secreted weapon upon him, he was permitted to
pass, and it was a very necessary precaution to examine such a fellow
strictly, for he was a Goorkah, or bastard Tartar, a race pre-eminently
bloodthirsty and cruel, and of the same sect with those who committed
such wanton cruelties on the poor unfortunate spy of Ettoondah. In
obedience to our instructions, we passed him into camp, and in about an
hour he returned, his sallow face contracted and distorted with all the
rage and malice that can make the human features terrific. He passed on
in sullen silence, in his heart vowing vengeance, as he had no doubt
been unsuccessful in his embassy. His sudden exit, and obvious
displeasure, indicated a renewal of hostilities; at least so said the
all-wise captain, who was the very fountain of information--a complete
reservoir of the pure stream of knowledge, at least as far as his own
opinion went.

Notwithstanding this sage prediction, however, two more days passed
away, when another ambassador came into camp--if not so holy as the
former, certainly more like a statesman. This second messenger remained
a considerable time in deep and secret conversation with our noble
general, who could see as far as most folks, although the service had
deprived him of one eye. At last he left, his eye beaming delight. He
smiled and bowed as he passed, and we, one and all, immediately flew to
the sure channel of information. His opinion was peace; and, for once
during the captain's campaigns, he was right, for, the day following,
the firing from our batteries ceased, and the uncle to the then reigning
rajah, who was regent, was expected in camp. Every eye was on the
look-out for this great personage, and various were the opinions of the
anxious multitude, and they were as ridiculous as they were varied. The
wise captain was not idle, either with his glass or his tongue. To do
honour to the reception of such a personage, the two flank companies of
the 87th regiment, and the two flank companies of the 25th native
infantry, formed a street to the general's tent, where every preparation
was made to receive our visitor as regent, and uncle to the reigning
rajah, who was a boy. Having waited some hours after the time, Sir David
began to get nettled, and was in the act of withdrawing the troops and
setting our batteries to work, when the shrill sound of the war-trumpet,
and the roll of the war-drum, were heard, which were signals that the
regent was on the move. Shortly afterwards we saw him descending the
hill in a superb palanquin, attended by about twenty armed men on foot.
At the end of the street he was met by the adjutant-general,
quarter-master-general, and several other staff-officers; and, after a
little hugging, they led him on, taking his hands in theirs in token of
friendship. Thus they proceeded to the general's splendid tent, the
street presenting arms, which he perfectly understood, and to which he
bowed in a most majestic manner. I do not think that in the course of my
service I ever beheld a more noble and venerable-looking man. He was
most superbly dressed, with numberless daggers stuck in his cumerbund,
and a sword by his side that seemed studded with diamonds and precious
stones. His neck, turban, and hands were one mass of jewels. Our brave
general met him at the door of his tent, when the greeting was most
laughable; something like that of Doodle and Noodle, in "Tom Thumb." The
manners of our visitor were those of a perfect courtier; but he was
free, affable, and jocular. In two hours after the customary sprinkling
of scents, the treaty of peace was ratified, and he returned towards
home with pleasure in his eye. Here the wise captain ran about,
delighted and delighting, saying, "Did I not tell you so? I knew it--I
could not be deceived--the thing was plain. People must have been blind
not to have foreseen this event."

Thus ended the fighting against the Nepaulese, this having been the
second campaign in what is called the Goorkah war. It was a fortunate
thing for all hands that hostilities were thus terminated, for seventy
men of the 87th regiment had that morning gone to hospital with the
dysentery, a complaint that was raging with great violence, from the
damp situation of the valley, and the thick fogs that lodged there till
nearly mid-day. Guns were ordered down, and we began to prepare for
quarters. None were sorry for it, for already were our toes playing at
hide-and-seek through our boots, and our wardrobes were much the worse
for wear. We were given to understand, from the quarter-master-general,
that the post which we took had been vacated by the enemy's troops,
without orders, and that they were sent back reinforced to retake and
keep it, in which attempt, if they did not succeed, their heads were to
be the forfeit. This accounts for the desperate manner in which they
fought and struggled to keep the post.

Having vacated the hill, and our enemies having now become our
friends--for many of them had already come down into camp for the
purpose of purchasing articles in our bazaars--some three or four of us
made a party to visit the fort and stockades; for which purpose we
started after breakfast, and reached their advanced outpost. Here we
were stopped, and informed that we could not be permitted to proceed any
further, without the permission of the keeledar, or governor of the
fort; but that, if we would wait, a man should be sent to ask if we
might advance. To this we consented, and, in about half an hour after,
the man who had been sent on this errand came back, with two other men,
and said the keeledar had been pleased to grant us permission to go, but
that we must go unarmed, leaving our swords in the last stockade. The
ascent of the hill towards the fort was extremely difficult; and at
every turning of the road was a strong stockade with guns; so that our
necessary loss in taking these hills and posts must have been enormous,
for there was scarcely any footing.

We at last reached the grand fort of Muckwanpore, if it deserved the
name. It was built of stone and brick, and was very high; but a dozen
shots from our twenty-four-pounders would have levelled it with the
ground. Indeed, one bastion had given warning of its intending to stand
no longer. The tempests that rage in these hills had shaken its
foundation. The gate was strong, but its hinges were small. On our
entering, a small guard at the gate presented arms, a drummer beat the
grenadiers' march, and a little fifer played the tune. Both the drum and
the fife were of English manufacture. A little further was the tent we
had seen in the stockade--at least some part of it. It was riddled like
a sieve with our shells, and the top of it was hanging in ribbons. Here
we were introduced to the governor, who was seated on a greasy cushion,
the pillows of which, though they had once been white, were now the
colour of his face. He received us cordially, and shook hands with us
most heartily; and he was really a very jolly old fellow, some twenty
or twenty-three stone, his fat sides hanging in large flaps over his
hips, which we sometimes made shake again with laughter. He paid us many
compliments about our fighting and system of warfare, and wanted to know
how many thousands we had had killed. When we assured him that we had
not lost more than forty he laughed heartily, and said, we meant forty
hundred, for they had lost more than that. We spent a pleasant hour with
this fat governor, who, after we had looked round the fort, had the
politeness to parade his regiment for our inspection. I never saw a
finer body of men in my life. They were as well armed, and as well
equipped in every respect, as our native troops. After this we returned
to camp, and the following morning marched towards cantonments.

[Illustration: GHOORKA SOLDIER.

From a Sketch taken by the late Earl of MUNSTER.]

As all treaties contracted in India, between native and European powers,
are ever to be held with a jealous and watchful eye (for naught but time
can make them valid), it was necessary for us to take up a position to
watch the proceedings of our new friends. Under the cloak of friendship,
some of the most barbarous massacres have been perpetrated; and treaties
have been frequently signed and sealed, and, ere the signature was dry,
the enemy have commenced infringing on their contracts and sacred ties.
It has even been known that, during the time occupied by the parley
necessary for completing such negotiations, the enemy have been busily
engaged in making preparations for striking a more effectual blow. It
was but prudent, therefore, that we should keep our eye upon them. In
accordance with one of the covenants of the treaty, a British resident,
and the usual escort, were to remain at the capital. This escort
marched, on the same day we did, to Khatmandoo. Our march was through
the pass of Cheriagotte, where the mad-brained young officers wanted to
force an entrance. My description of this pass, as I proceed, will prove
how fatal, and contrary to the dictates of reason, would have been any
such attempt.

I was on the rear-guard the morning we left the valley of Muckwanpore.
The enemy--or, perhaps, I should say our friends--flocked in great
numbers, to bid us farewell, or see us depart. The whole of the baggage
was nearly gone, when a number of these soldiers gathered round the
guard, asking all manner of questions. A most respectable-looking young
man, wearing the dress of an officer, came up to me and said, "Were you
not in the action on the hill of Muckwanpore?"

I told him that I had had that honour.

He replied, "So was I; and I fired three shots at you from behind a
tree--are you not wounded?"

I replied, "No."

"Well," said he, "I never missed my man before in my life."

I asked him at what period of the action it was that he aimed at me.

"When you were fighting with Sobah Khissna Rhannah," replied he.

"You were not far from your man, then," said I, "for one of your shots
struck the peak of my cap."

At this he laughed. He afterwards complimented me on my swordmanship,
and said that few could touch the sobah in that exercise. He then asked
to look at one of my men's muskets, and he put himself through the
manual and platoon exercises, giving himself the word of command in
English. I never saw motions more clean or more compactly executed. I
asked him where he learned English, and the English modes of drill. He
replied, "From Browne," who was a deserter from the Company's European
regiment. He added, that a man of the name of Bell, a deserter from the
Company's Foot Artillery, had also taught him his exercise, and Browne
had instructed him in English. The former, he said, had been made
colonel of artillery, and the latter schoolmaster; but they had both
been discharged from the service at the commencement of the war.

At last we moved off, the young stranger shaking me heartily by the
hand, and saying, "I love a brave soldier; and the white men are all
brave." This young man, it appeared, was the adjutant of the corps of
which Khissna Rhannah, who fell under my fortunate sabre, was colonel.

Our first march was tolerably easy, as it lay under a winding hill; and
we reached nearly the top of the pass, and encamped. On the following
morning we dispatched our things very early, to prevent them falling
into the hands of the people, should they attempt to prove
treacherous--which was not at all improbable--after we had descended the
ghauts. When under the base of the hill, the road, which had been before
wide and tolerably good, narrowed off, and we soon found ourselves
sinking down between two enormous hills. The road was scarcely wide
enough, in some places, to admit an elephant, with his load, to pass. On
each side of this terrific hill were huge rocks and stones piled up for
our destruction. Some, of enormous size, the least touch would have
precipitated upon our heads, and they seemed to have been rolled to the
brink for that purpose. There were stockades upon stockades, all looking
on and commanding this little and narrow excavated pathway. Had we once
entered, as I have before mentioned was suggested by some rash-brained
young officers, not a soul could have escaped destruction. I should
think that, in the middle of this ghaut, the perpendicular rock on each
side must have been five hundred feet high; and therefore, had there
been no other weapons of destruction than the ponderous masses of rock
and stone which they could have hurled upon us, our annihilation must
have been inevitable, for escape was impossible.

When we reached the other side, the eye was met by stockades, fortified
hills in all directions, and strong breastworks thrown across the
roadway, which was here somewhat wider; though our road all along was,
in fact, nothing more than the bed of a river, surrounded and commanded
by numberless little fortified sugar-loaf hills. These the foe had been
obliged to ascend by means of ladders. To complete the destruction these
hills must have dealt upon us, they had poisoned a stream of water,
either previous to our march from the ravine some ten days before, or
since the treaty of peace was signed; but this was timely detected. The
poisonous grass I have before alluded to, had been sunk in a kind of
basin, which was constantly replenished by water that fell from the
rocks behind it. This might be about twenty yards round, and two deep.
On the morning of our return, an elephant, belonging to
Lieutenant-Colonel Rose, of the Company's army, as also a horse
belonging to that officer, had preceded the army, and even the baggage.
The elephant got his fore feet in the water, of which he drank a little,
but seemed not to relish it. The horse could not be induced to drink
much, nor would the elephant again touch it. When urged by his keeper,
such was his perverseness, that the driver descended, and, on looking at
the water, he saw a yellowish colour rising to the surface, which was
caused by the pressure of the elephant's feet on the grass. The keeper
immediately introduced his hand, and pulled out the poisonous herb. This
occurrence was without delay communicated to our gallant commander; and,
never shall I forget his indignation and displeasure at this
intelligence. The fact being ascertained by the medical department, and
both the elephant and horse dying shortly afterwards, Sir David
peremptorily called upon the Nepaul government for satisfaction for this
diabolical attempt to poison his army; but they denied all knowledge of
such a base transaction, protesting that the heads of the offenders
should be the penalty, if they could discover the authors of such a
scheme, which they affected to suppose must be the act of some
individual who had sustained injury by the war. They promised that a
most strict inquiry should be set on foot, and that the result should be
made known to our government. Here, I believe, the business ended; at
least, we heard no more of it. A guard was, after this discovery,
placed on the poisoned water, to prevent any of the cattle that followed
from drinking it; and the basin was afterwards filled up by our
pioneers, as an effectual remedy to prevent any other travellers that
might be journeying that way from becoming its victims.

Nothing worth narrating happened during our march to our new place of
encampment, or where a temporary cantonment was to be erected; save that
we went to visit the still exposed bones of those poor creatures who
were murdered at Summanpore and Persah. Skulls, and whole bodies, were
here to be seen in all directions, and scarcely a tree that had not
fifty shots in it. We dropped a tear to the memory of the poor fellows
who had here fallen, and committed their fleshless bones to the earth.

Having arrived at our new place of encampment, we found that some
temporary barracks had been erected there, for two regiments, the year
before. The site of our new cantonment was marked out. It was on the
banks of a beautiful lake, well stocked with fish and wild fowl. Here
every one commenced building his hut, not knowing the moment we might be
called upon to re-commence the campaign; for breach of treaties with
such people was an everyday occurrence. From the long and uninterrupted
friendship which has now subsisted between the two nations, we may, I
think, with fairness conclude, that first impressions are the most
durable; and, if in my power, I would take especial care not to run the
risk of a failure at the beginning of a campaign. An effectual blow then
makes the enemy shy and tame; and the complete victory gained over the
Nepaulese, at Muckwanpore, beat them into principles they never knew
before. They are, however, still tenacious of admitting strangers into
their country, and it is with difficulty that a passport can be obtained
to visit any part of their beautiful territory.

In the month of March we had built and completed our bungalows, or huts,
containing two or three rooms each; but we had scarcely got housed when
we received orders to proceed to Cawnpore by water--a tedious and long
trip at that time of the year. I therefore, being almost tired of war's
alarms, began to turn my mind towards the object of my affections, with
whom I had kept up a constant correspondence during the whole campaign.
I asked for permission to proceed by land to Cawnpore. This was readily
granted, and I started alone on this long trip--a distance of four
hundred and thirty miles.

[Illustration]

[Illustration]

[Illustration: THE FORT OF HATTRAS.

From a Sketch taken by the late Earl of MUNSTER.]




CHAPTER XV.


I reached Cawnpore in twelve days, after a very harassing journey, the
fatigues of which laid me on a bed of sickness; but the affectionate
nursing of the fair object of my love, and the kind attentions of her
excellent family, soon restored me to health, and I was married on the
4th of April, 1816.

I was received by my old regiment in the most cordial manner; and their
continued marks of kindness to me and my young wife, kept pace with the
liberality of their mess. No stranger was permitted to pass through the
station without a liberal invitation from the 24th Light Dragoons. Soon
after this, my own regiment arrived, when every hand was extended to bid
me welcome; and the next eighteen months were spent by me in domestic
felicity. At the expiration of that time, we were called upon again to
put our limbs in marching order, on an expedition against the strong
forts of Hattrass, Cummoun, and some other refractory dependencies of
the Hattrass rajah.

The former of these forts is situate about thirty miles from Agra, and
twelve from Muttra. It is a mud fort, standing in the middle of the most
fertile country in Bengal, and is a place of immense strength, in
consequence of its enormous ditch, eighty feet wide, by seventy and
seventy-five feet deep, with but two small bridges, extremely narrow,
and which the occupants of the fort could destroy in an instant.

On our arrival before this place, a negotiation was entered into with
the political agent and a messenger from the fort; but still our
operations went on in the most active manner. We could not expect
success but by a regular and progressive siege, as, independently of the
fort, there was also a walled town, which it would be necessary to take
and occupy, before we could get near enough to the former to mine and
breach it. For the taking of the town our first batteries were erecting
during the parley, as convincing proofs that we were in earnest. This
siege was under the command of Major-General Sir Dyson Marshall, K.C.B.

Mid-day was finally to determine peace or war. The embassy had been in
camp all the morning, begging for time to consider of the proffered
terms, or, more probably, to endeavour to meet the foe. This stratagem
had often been resorted to on similar occasions, to gain the same end;
and I have known instances when those creatures would swear by all their
heathen gods and goddesses, that their great wish was to be reconciled,
when, in reality, they were only plotting a more formidable resistance.
I have often heard them swear by their most sacred Ganges, what was well
known, both to us and them, to be the most palpable falsehood. I have
seen these sycophants kiss the earth, and call everything dear to them
to witness their asseverations, when they have been uttering the most
abominable falsehoods to gain some end. I have also seen them beat their
breasts and tear their hair, in indication of their love and friendship,
when all the while the canker-worm was busy in their hearts. If you
permit them, they will put off the evil day from week to week, and from
month to month, having always something new to start. This day the
vakeel had brought to camp the most positive assurance that his master,
the rajah, would be in camp to sign and ratify a treaty on the proffered
terms. On receiving this intelligence, our good general directed that
our batteries should not open till the hour of twelve that day.

Ten o'clock arrived, but no rajah; eleven o'clock and half-past eleven
passed away, but still no appearance of the great man from the fort.
About a quarter before the awful hour, the vakeel was seen emerging from
the political agent's tent, and mounting his rut; but his contracted
brow betrayed the agitation of his mind. He set off at speed. I rode
beside him as far as our grand battery, and he told me on the way that
all was settled, and that the rajah was coming into camp. Scarcely had
he uttered this lie, when the awful bell struck twelve, and our
batteries opened at the same instant. In a moment the whole town was
enveloped in one dense cloud of smoke. The instant the vakeel heard the
guns, he leapt out of his carriage, and ran as fast as he could towards
the fort, screaming in notes something like the angry tiger. This being
the case, I took the liberty of taking the rut and horse to camp as
prize property. Whether he reached the fort in safety I know not, for we
never saw nor heard anything more of his fat ambassadorship; so I
suppose he suffered with many hundreds of others during the siege. The
moment our batteries opened, their guns also opened a heavy cannonade,
evidencing the truth of what the vakeel had been holding forth. Our
siege went on progressively and systematically, keeping in view the
grand point in all sieges, preservation of men's lives, and going to
work with our eyes open. Our breaching-distance from the wall of the
town was only about four hundred yards; and therefore, if we were
inclined to take a peep at things, we were obliged to do it on the sly,
for we were within half musket-shot; so near, indeed, that we were
obliged to have screens for our embrasures, to protect the men when
loading and laying the guns. The parts breached were the two extreme
corners. When we commenced, the town was full of men; but we sent them a
few shrapnells and a few rockets, which played beautifully along the
tops of the houses, and up the narrow streets; and, in one hour,
scarcely a man was to be seen on the ramparts; but we could hear them
busily at work digging something, which we afterwards found to be holes,
to hide from the shells, over which they covered themselves with old
doors and pieces of plank. Some of our shells, however, found them,
even in those dreary hiding-places. Many of their houses were on fire.
The Congreve rocket is a most destructive instrument of death; its
enormous shaking tail carries everything before it; and, when it
explodes, it kills some yards round, and fires houses right and left.
Our little whistling shrapnells quite discomposed the gravity of their
hoary-headed priests, and drove them into the fort to seek refuge, and
call in the aid of their heathen gods; but not one could be prevailed
upon to interpose, even so far as to stop a single rocket or shell. Some
long shots were then thrown from some of the large guns in the town,
near and into camp; but these caused no other inconvenience than to put
some ladies, who had come from Agra to be spectators of the scene, to
the double-quick, who never thought themselves safe till in their own
dear homes, some thirty miles off. One lady only remained; but she kept
at a much more respectful distance than before.

A reward was given for all description of balls brought into camp,
varying in amount according to size. Such is the avarice of the natives
who hover about camps, that they will risk anything for money. Near the
right of the line, balls used frequently to be thrown, and some of them
rolled as far as the piquet. I was riding in that direction one morning
when balls were flying pretty thick. A native saw one lob, and ran to
stop it. In this attempt, one of his legs was so badly broken, that I
believe it was afterwards amputated. If he had carried the ball to camp,
he would have got about fourpence for it!

In two days the breaches began to wear a stormable appearance; and, on
the third day, the storming parties were ordered to be in readiness
about two o'clock in the afternoon. The day was calm, and the sky serene
and cloudless. By three o'clock every soldier was at his post, ready and
willing to perform the service of his country, and add new laurels to
its crown. The left column was to be led by the 87th, or Prince's Own
regiment, who were as merry as crickets; and the right column by the
14th regiment, a beautiful corps. About half-past three we moved off
towards the town, in silence. Under cover of the village we halted, and
an unaccountable delay ensued. Here we sat down and talked over the work
before us. While thus engaged, the eye of an inquisitive officer was
fixed on another officer of the same regiment, who had taken his
epaulette from his shoulder, and his plate and feather off his cap, so
that he looked for all the world like some discharged pensioner. This
strange metamorphosis drew upon him the ridicule of his brother
officers, and the scoffing of the soldiers. Whatever might be his motive
for such an alteration in his dress, to say the least of it, it was
extremely imprudent and improper; for, by such conduct, he incurred the
animadversion of the soldiers of his own regiment, who would, in all
probability, put the most illiberal construction on it. The officers did
not fail to have their jokes and draw their conclusions from such a
strange circumstance; and, when the question was put to him, why he did
such a thing, his answer confirmed the ill-natured surmises that had
gone abroad, his avowed object being that the enemy should not know him
from a private soldier of the regiment. How far such an expedient may
have deserved censure, I leave the public to judge. I merely introduce
the instance to warn other young officers against doing anything that
may justify the animadversions of the soldiers, or bring them under the
lash and ridicule of their brother officers. Whatever might have been
the feelings of this young officer--and I should be sorry to impute his
conduct to anything but thoughtlessness--I can venture to assert that he
never re-established his former character; in consequence of which, he
some time after left the regiment. Therefore, young soldier, never be
ashamed to let your foe know that you hold his majesty's commission. I
would sooner cram it down their throats than have my honour or courage
doubted. Be tenacious of your character, more especially in the point
of courage. If you trifle with this, the sooner you cut and run the
better.

The head engineer, conceiving the breaches not practicable, from his not
knowing the depth and width of the ditch, had the storming postponed
till the following day, with the view that an opportunity might be
afforded him, under cover of the night, to obtain the necessary
information. At night this officer stole down to the ditch unobserved,
and, on his return, he seemed delighted beyond bounds that the storm did
not take place, as the ditch was so wide and deep that an entrance was
impossible. It appeared that what had been knocked off the bastion, had
not actually filled up any part of the trench, but only hung to the
sides of it.

On the following morning, we found that the enemy, having seen us march
down the evening before, had fled when the night closed in, supposing we
were going to storm in the night. On this being ascertained, a strong
party was instantly dispatched to occupy the town. We found some
difficulty in obtaining an entrance, as they had barricaded the two
gates with stone and large bales of cotton. At last, we were obliged to
scale the walls with ladders. With the exception of a few poor old
people, not a living soul was to be seen in the town; but the number of
the dead was considerable. Two elephants had been slain, and camels,
horses, bullocks, goats, &c., lay killed in all directions. After
sauntering about the town, and taking a peep on the other side, we found
that the fort was quite close. The moment the enemy saw us, they
commenced a heavy cannonade; and the tremendous peals of musketry which
followed informed us that they had not run far. The prize agents now
turned us all out, supposing, with a good deal of reason, that we were
not to be trusted with gold mohurs and rupees, of which a few were found
in some of the banking-houses.

On the following day, after reconnoitring the fort and the ground in its
vicinity, spots were fixed upon for new breaching and shelling
batteries; and, in twenty-four hours afterwards, we commenced our work
of death on the fort and its obdurate inmates. Long ere the hour of the
sun's decline, it grew as dark as midnight. About ten o'clock, the
terrific shelling commenced, every whistling shell bearing on its
lighted wings messengers of death and desolation. I never saw these
implements of destruction so accurately thrown--some of them scarcely
five inches above the walls of the fort. In five minutes the screams of
the women in the fort were dreadful. In a place so confined, where
numberless houses were crowded together, every shell must have found its
way to some poor wretch's dwelling, and, perhaps, torn from mothers'
bosoms their clinging babes. No person can estimate the dreadful carnage
committed by shells, but those whose fate it has been to witness the
effects of these messengers of death. On this occasion our shells were
very numerous, and of enormous size, many of them thirteen and a half
inches in calibre. The system of shelling had been so improved in the
twelve years which had elapsed since the siege of Bhurtpore, that,
instead of about one shell in five minutes from a single battery, it was
by no means extraordinary to see twenty in one minute, from the numerous
batteries which were brought to bear upon this place. It was, at times,
truly awful to see ten of these soaring in the air together, seemingly
riding on the midnight breeze, and disturbing the slumbering clouds on
their pillows of rest--all transporting to a destined spot the
implements of havoc and desolation contained within their iron sides.
The moon hid herself, in seeming pensiveness, behind a dense black
cloud, as though reluctant to look on such a scene; and the feathered
tribe, that were wont, in those warm nights of summer, to melodize the
breeze, retired far into the distant woods, there to tune their notes of
sorrow. Mortal language cannot array such a scene in its garb of
blackest woe. Some carcasses were also thrown. These, when in the air,
are not unlike a fiery man soaring above. They are sent to burn houses,
or blow up magazines. Far and wide they stretch forth their claws of
death; and well might the poor natives call them devils of the night, or
fiends of the clouds. To complete this dreadful scene, the roaring
Congreves ran along the bastion's top, breaking legs and arms with their
shaking tails. Nothing could be more grand to the eye, or more affecting
to the sympathizing heart, than this horrid spectacle. Still, the
superstitious foe were stimulated by some hoary priest with hopes of
victory, thus imbruing their hands in the blood of their children, their
parents, and their friends. Our shells found their way to their very
cells, tearing babes from their mothers' bosoms, and dealing death and
destruction around. Oh! what must be the anguish of a fond mother, to
see nothing but the head of her fondling hanging to her bosom! I will
relate one melancholy case of this kind, out of numbers that came within
my observation, and actually happened at this place.

A female was lying on a bed of green silk; under her head was a pillow
of the same material; her right arm had, no doubt, cradled her babe; and
her left was extended as though for the purpose of keeping her child
close to her. A large shell had perforated the tiled roof, and, having
made its way through three floors, had gone through the foot of the bed,
and penetrated some depth into the fourth floor. A piece of this shell
had gone through the woman's forehead, carrying away a great part of the
head; so that her death, according to the opinion of a medical man who
saw her, must have been instantaneous. The lower part of the child's
body, from the hips downward, was entirely gone; but, strange to say,
its mother's nipple still hung in the left corner of its mouth, and its
little right hand still held by its mother's clothes, which probably it
had grasped at the first noise of the shell. We understood that this
woman was the wife of a most respectable officer in the fort, who had
also met his death some hours before her, and was, therefore, in pity
spared the afflicting sight. Such, reader, are the scenes of war! Such
are the sights which soldiers, in the course of service, are called upon
to witness! The poor woman and her babe were committed to the
grave--probably the first of her generation that ever returned to the
earth as her last home; for she was a Hindoo woman.

The garrison of this fort had been solicited, in the warmest manner, to
send their families to their homes, with a promise that they should be
guarded to any part of the country, and their property guaranteed to
them. To these proposals, dictated by the feelings of humanity, which
our good general possessed in a most eminent degree, we received nothing
but contemptuous answers. Be the blood of their slaughtered relatives,
therefore, on their shoulders, not on ours! Wherever the troops of the
Company have been employed, humanity has always marked their steps; yet
I have only known one instance in my long service, in which the natives
consented to avail themselves of the kind offer made to them, that their
families should be protected. I shall have the pleasure of mentioning
this in its proper place.

It was currently reported, and there seemed to be some foundation for
such a report, that there were immense treasures in the fort. This was a
more shining prospect than we had contemplated. Nothing could be more
congenial to our minds than the chance of touching the coin. These
anticipations gladdened our very hearts, and kept us watchful and
vigilant. To say the truth, I do not know any class of people more
deserving of money, or who can spend it in a more gentlemanlike manner,
than soldiers. From our late gaieties at Cawnpore, and having danced my
marriage rounds through the whole station, my purse, at this critical
juncture, was in deep decline. It had undergone a most severe draining,
and its contents had dwindled away to a single silver piece. My account
with the paymaster had also made an oblique evolution, and settled on
the wrong side, leaving me no credit by the position it had taken. Since
this untoward account had taken that whim into its head, the paymaster
was never at home. A confounded bore this--always to find people out,
whom you particularly want to see, and have a little sterling confab
with. Thus stood the case, or rather, thus stood my purse, yawning for
lack of coin; and this was the case with many others. Was it a wonder,
then, that we so readily gave credit to the reports which were in
circulation touching the probability of our reaping a golden harvest by
this siege?

With these prospects in view, the siege went on with all possible
energy. Having viewed the gaping ditch, and assured ourselves of the
impossibility of both descent and ascent, we had pushed our mining
operations within thirty yards of the top of the glacis, and began to
descend into the bowels of the earth. I was this day on a working-party,
with one hundred men, and had just arrived in the tool-yard, about three
hundred yards from the left of the trenches, when I was thrown flat on
my face by some violent shock of the earth. Before the general shock,
the earth seemed in dreadful convulsions. The walls surrounding the
tool-yard were propelled forward from the fort, and fell to the ground.
Stones, bricks, pieces of wood, and, nearer the fort, bodies and limbs,
were to be seen soaring in the air in all directions. For the moment,
consternation and dismay were depicted on every face. When I arose, I
felt much alarmed; the earth seemed still to move under me; and at first
I thought something had happened to me alone; but, on looking around, I
found my men, some in the attitude of prayer, and others lying down,
hiding their faces with fear. Having recovered my senses, I looked
towards the fort, and saw it enveloped in one dense cloud of smoke or
dust, and, now and then, streaks of fire issuing from its battlements.
In the midst of this momentary alarm, there was an indistinct buzzing
that the grand magazine of the enemy had been blown up. This report
having reached my ears, I ran, or rather rolled, along the trenches, and
was informed that their grand magazine had really been blown up by one
of our shells. Again looking towards the tomb of destruction, what a
sight met the eye! The smoke which arose from the ruins seemed to be a
solid and substantial structure, gradually and majestically ascending to
the skies, bearing on its top variegated volumes of vapour, that seemed
to ride upon its summit. From this ascending mountain were ever and anon
vomited forth sheets of vivid fire; and glittering sand fell in showers
around the spot. Through this dense, but really unsubstantial mass, was
to be seen the setting sun, spreading his luminous beams through the
gigantic phenomenon; and the beauty of the sight was beyond human fancy
to imagine. This tremendous volume of smoke seemed almost to rise
perpendicularly, verging off a little with the wind, which scarcely
breathed. When it had ascended so that the sun was visible under it, the
mass above changed colour, and you might trace on it the most brilliant
rays of the rainbow. This continued ascending in various forms, until,
at last, it was lost in distance: after which, every eye was directed
towards the destruction below; and the sight was frightful indeed.
Heads, bodies, legs, arms, hands, spears, guns, muskets, planks, and
colours, lay indiscriminately among the pile of ruin. Four thousand
maunds, or three hundred and twenty thousand pounds of gunpowder, an
accumulation of years, were contained in this magazine. This was buried
in stone magazines, some hundreds of feet under the earth; and it was
supposed that the major part of the garrison had sought refuge in those
excavated vaults, from the destruction of our shells, and were there
entombed in this pile of ruin and desolation. The cries of men, women,
and children, and the groans of wounded horses, could be distinctly
heard, and drew from every eye the tear of pity. Our guns had ceased
firing, no one knew why. There were no shoutings of exultation; but, on
the contrary, loud were the expressions of commiseration and sorrow.
Amidst the convulsion, it was a most extraordinary fact, that the new
and scarcely finished temple of the inmates of the fort still reared its
superstitious head, and, on the very margin of their once boasted and
inexhaustible mine of powder and ball, stood uninjured amidst the
general wreck, divested only of its scaffolding. This coincidence, which
they, no doubt, attributed to supernatural agency, still fed their
deluded hopes, and they would not bend the stubborn knee and ask for
mercy, but still persisted in their resistance, led on by some
hoary-headed priest, who would not tear himself away from his ill-gotten
stores. The night closed in as cold as the hearts of these obdurate
creatures; the sky was serene and clear; and the moon rose in her most
effulgent brightness.

The moon had now risen high above the tops of Rumnah (a place where they
keep preserved game), when our guns re-opened, and more messengers of
destruction were sent to complete the work of death. Every hand employed
against the fort would willingly have carried these poor creatures the
cup of peace and the balm of comfort, rather than send them more woe;
but, notwithstanding these sympathetic feelings, there is a duty we owe
ourselves and our country. We were in honour bound to push the siege;
but this was our duty, not our inclination: nor is it true that
soldiers, inured to scenes of war, do not possess the nicer feelings of
the heart. The shelling again roared through their narrow streets, and
tore up their little dwellings by the roots, each hurling additional
victims into the gaping pile. About the hour of midnight, there seemed a
bustle and clashing of arms amongst the people in the fort, and I began
to think that they intended to give us leg; so I kept a good look-out. I
crept close to the edge of the ditch, and listened. I could hear voices,
but not distinctly what they said. I was observed from the fort, and
nearly paid dear for my peeping. Several shots were fired, one of which
struck close to my head. I moved my quarters to a more safe place; and,
from the neighing of horses, it was pretty evident to me that they were
on the bit: but, as I was no reservoir of news, I took good care to keep
my opinion to myself, until the thing became more certain. Five minutes
after, I saw some of them outside of the fort, on horseback, waiting to
assemble in force, before they attempted to break through our mounted
cavalry, which formed a chain of sentinels round this side. It was
imagined impossible that they could make their escape. I communicated
what I had seen to the commanding officer of the protecting party, who
had a hundred native men under his command, which would, in all
probability, have been sufficient to have stopped them; for, no doubt,
they did not intend to go empty-handed away, but laden with gold mohurs.
When I first communicated this intelligence to the officer on duty, he
politely said it was only fancy--they were no flinchers. I told him that
I could see them coming out; but he replied, sarcastically, "Then why
don't you go and stop them? I will tell you what, Shipp--you are never
easy unless your head is in the cannon's mouth." At the first part of
this reproof I got terribly nettled, and warmly replied, "Had I your
means, Captain Brewer (alluding to the men under his command), I would
stop them; but, as my men have only their pickaxes and shovels, it would
be an act of pure madness to attempt such a thing; though it is by no
means clear to me that I could not even stay their flight with these
poor means." At this he instantly flew into a rage, and said, "Pray,
Sir, what do you mean to insinuate by what you have this moment given
utterance to?"--"My dear Brewer," said I, "you know I am as poor as the
inside of a sentry-box, and it is really a pity to see these fellows
under our very noses, walking off with the coin." He smilingly replied,
"That's true; and I will prevent it if possible." So on we marched at
double-quick; and, all I could do and say, I could not prevent my men,
armed, as they were, with pickaxes and shovels, from following me. I
threatened to cut the first man down who dared attempt to leave his
post; but no sooner was I gone than my men were close at my heels; and
one fellow came running up to me, and said, pointing to a small village,
close by the entrance of the bridge, "By the powers, your honour, but
there is a whole generation of cavalry, all mounted on horses. See, your
honour, some of them that are halted are coming this way." I replied,
"What the devil has brought you here?"--"Does your honour think I would
lave you in this blusteration?" said Paddy. On getting pretty close to
these "cavalry on horseback," my attention was drawn off from the
soldier, who, on turning round, I found was close at my elbow, with a
pickaxe on his shoulder. Here the enemy, observing us, rode off to the
left at full speed. One I endeavoured to stop, and he rode at me. I
gathered myself up in an attitude of defence, resolved, if possible, to
dismount him; but, unfortunately, his horse's foot struck the inside of
my thigh, and down I went, and he had the politeness to fire his
matchlock at me, but it did not touch me. He rode on, and I jumped up,
and again recovered my station at the head of the party. We now arrived
at the end of the bridge, where there was a kind of half-moon battery or
breastwork--at least there had been, but now nothing but the parapet and
embrasures remained. Behind these my men, many of whom had followed me,
took refuge, till we had again driven the enemy into the fort. We pushed
on, and on the bridge the struggle was dreadful. The enemy wanted to
come out, and we wanted to go in. They would not permit us to go in; and
we, equally unaccommodating, would not let them out. This was the
dispute; and, after a good deal of fighting, we not only stopped their
intended journey, but put an end to many of their lives. They, for a
time, disputed every inch of ground with us; but Jack Sepoy was not to
be done; and we, after a hard struggle, gained possession not only of
the bridge, but of the inner gate. Here they had the advantage for a
time, for they had fastened the inner gate, which, however, yielded to
force. At this moment I received a tremendous blow from a large piece of
wood that was thrown from the ramparts, and hit me on the head; I fell
to the ground, stunned for a moment, but soon got up again. When I was
knocked down by the log of wood, a sergeant halloed out, "By the powers,
but he is kilt at last outright!"--"Not quite, sergeant," said I; "but
it was a devil of a blow."--"Och! never mind that, your honour," said
the sergeant, "it's all in the army." "No, sergeant," I replied, "it is
all on my head." A few seconds after this, the same sergeant received a
similar salute, which made him hug the ground, when a soldier who was
near him sang out, "Are you kilt, sergeant, dear?"--"Upon my
conscience," groaned the sergeant, "I don't know; but I feel mighty
queer, so I do."

I had not been on my legs again above a second, and had scarcely time to
scratch my head, when there was a dreadful explosion of powder. The
shock caused by this explosion nearly threw me down again. On looking
behind, I found it necessary to give some orders, and I pointed to the
object of my instructions. Some ill-natured fellow from the ramparts
thought I was pointing the finger of derision at him, so he let fly his
matchlock at me, and shot me through the very finger I was pointing
with--the forefinger of the left hand. The shot passed through the
finger, and, carrying away nearly the whole of the bone of the two first
joints, grazed the palm of my hand, and passed through the lapel of my
coat. At last the inner gate yielded to force, and we rushed into the
body of the fort. On our first entrance, we could see women and children
flying across the narrow streets; some mothers bearing their offspring
in their bleeding arms; some dropping them in their flight; and others
meeting death from the balls of our men, who were firing at random. Many
poor childless mothers threw themselves on the points of our men's
bayonets, and some begged for mercy. Putrid bodies, both of men and
beasts, lay about in all directions--some of them three or four deep;
and the smell was absolutely suffocating. The fighting soon ceased; and,
though many attempted to escape by another bridge, they were taken
prisoners.

The fort being now completely in our possession, as soon as the
prisoners had been secured, I examined my wound. An hour having elapsed
since I received it, my whole arm had begun to ache most dreadfully.
Finding, therefore, that I could do no further good to the service, I
was resolved I would do no harm to myself, so I bent my way towards
camp, to get my wound dressed. To be candid, I may as well confess that
I did not walk home, but rode one of the finest Persian horses I ever
beheld. I found him loose, running about the fort. I caught him, and
rode him with a piece of rope in his mouth. The good-natured
prize-agents did not request me to give him up; nor, perhaps, were they
aware that I had such an animal in my possession. Be that as it may,
however, I sold him at Lucknow, to the king of Oude, for two thousand
rupees--about two hundred pounds sterling. Having reported the capture
of the fort to the major-general, who was, of course, much pleased with
the information, and immediately made his arrangements accordingly, I
got my wound dressed. My good-natured doctor was pleased to announce to
me, that if I escaped with the loss of my finger, I might consider
myself fortunate; but he feared that the dreadful manner in which the
finger had been torn, would render amputation of the hand necessary. The
wound was evidently from an iron and rugged ball. Iron ball-wounds
immediately turn a rusty, or more of a yellow colour, and are bad
healing wounds. In the morning my wound was again dressed by another
medical friend; and it was so much better in the forenoon of the
following day, that I got into my palanquin and rode down to the fort. I
must beg to be excused from entering into a minute narration of the
scene inside. Let it suffice, that it far exceeded anything that man
could write, were he to sit down to draw a picture of the most abject
misery and woe. The most depraved wretch could not have looked on the
work of death which presented itself to our eyes, without being melted
into sorrow. I soon turned from such a sight, and stood towards home.

Near a small village, a beautiful young woman, about sixteen years of
age, had been seen, and ultimately seized. Her husband, to whom she had
only been wedded about three months, was one of those who were entombed
when the magazine blew up. From that period nothing could soothe her or
appease her grief; no power could restrain her; and at last she escaped
into the adjoining wood, or rumnah. When I saw her, she was running
wildly; but, at times, she would pause, hold up her finger, and tell you
to listen; when she would exclaim, with the most heart-rending shriek,
"That was him! It was he that did speak! Yet, now he is gone." Then the
poor bewildered maniac would tear her sloe-black hair, which was hanging
in ringlets down her back and bosom, and, at length, sink exhausted to
the ground. She was taken to camp, and committed to the care of some of
her relations, who had been taken prisoners.

[Illustration]

[Illustration]




CHAPTER XVI.


Amongst the prisoners captured in the fort of Hattrass, search was made
by us for the keeledar, and his friend the negotiator, who had been so
many times in camp; but neither of these gentlemen could be found; and
we naturally concluded they must have escaped on the evening of the
storm; for, strange to say, a great body of cavalry had cut their way
through some of our cavalry piquets. The Europeans saddled the native
corps of Hindostanee horse with this; and they in return threw the blame
on the European cavalry. Some part of this flying enemy, however, passed
the piquet of the 8th Light Dragoons, and several of the brave fellows
of that regiment were wounded in endeavouring to stop them; but I have
no doubt that the main body passed between the right of the 8th Dragoons
and the left of the corps of Captain Badley's horse, between which
flanks there was a wide space and a high-road. This road was watched by
a regiment of native infantry. From the beautiful horses left in the
fort, and the immense number of suits of chain armour we found strewed
about the stables of the cavalry, the whole of the enemy's horse must
have been in mail; so that our cavalry could have made but little
impression, even if they had fallen in with them. By this escape one of
our grand objects was defeated, by the loss of the person of the rebel
governor, who was wanted to answer his rebellion to an offended
government. How it was possible that a single individual could have
escaped such a bombardment, was to us a mystery; for large houses were
literally torn up by the roots. They had thrown a great number of their
dead into a well, and many lay in the ditch, a melancholy and revolting
sight, for the sun had swollen them to an enormous size.

It seems that, the moment any of their children were killed in houses
remote from the well, they were thrown into the street. I counted five
limbless babes in one street.

The day I left camp the maniac widow died; and it is with infinite
pleasure I now bid farewell, for a time, to such distressing scenes.

Deputies from the other forts and dependencies of this rajah had
witnessed the siege _incog._, and were no doubt in camp when the
explosion took place. Not being inclined to risk the same aerial ascent,
or to be entombed, as many hundreds of the poor creatures in Hattrass
had been, they readily surrendered to the wishes of the government. What
had become of Diaram--for that was the rajah's name--we could not
discover; but he was a dangerous man loose in a country like India, and
might do much mischief if he joined the Pindarees, who were then in full
force prowling about the country, not immediately in our provinces, but
lingering on the borders. After some search, this rajah was found with
Nawab Ameer-Khan, an independent chief; and, no sooner had the Company
discovered the place of his residence, than, instead of punishing the
rebel as he deserved, they munificently offered him a pension for
himself and family, if he would reside in our provinces. With these
terms the veteran rajah readily complied, and he is now residing in
affluence, peace, and happiness, under the Company's banner of
protection and shield of faith. I have heard from those who have since
seen him, that his loss in lives at Hattrass was upwards of fifteen
hundred in the fort, besides those in the town. Two of his nephews were
amongst the dead; and he himself encouraged his men in person during the
whole of the siege, and was scarcely ever from the ramparts.

My wound at this time assumed a dangerous appearance. It had been much
irritated by the extraction of several pieces of shattered bone; and, as
the weather at this period grew intensely hot, my doctor advised me not
to travel with the regiment, as he apprehended that the extreme heat,
and the constant shaking of the palanquin, might bring on inflammation.
I therefore the next afternoon left my corps for Cawnpore, some hundred
miles, by dawk,[15] and arrived there about the same time on the
afternoon of the following day. From having been more than
four-and-twenty hours without proper dressing, the whole of my arm, and
indeed all my left side, became much inflamed, and were extremely
painful; but the fond attentions of an affectionate wife, and the
kindness of her good family, soon made me forget my pains and aches.

I had such a home as few were blessed with; and, in the bosom of my
family, I forgot the toils of terrific war. By good nursing and good
medical advice, my wound began to mend apace; but there were still
pieces of bone protruding through the wound, which, however, were in
time extracted by the hand of skill.

The moment I got my hand dressed on the night I was wounded, I took the
precaution of sitting down to communicate the true particulars of the
affair to my family by letter, knowing well what erroneous reports are
often sent to the wives of soldiers, and communicated in the most blunt
and abrupt manner.

In a few days the regiment arrived in cantonments; and in a month or six
weeks I was again on parade with my company, little the worse, except
that I had an ugly and troublesome finger, which was always in the way.
I have since turned it to some use as a true register of the weather;
but, beyond this, I do not think I could even now make it so far useful
as efficiently to pull a man's nose with it.

[Illustration: TRAVELLING ON THE GANGES.

From a Drawing by W. DANIELL, R.A.]


I forgot to mention that, when I went down to visit the fort on the
morning after its fall, the prize-agents were busy on the look-out for
prize property, and to keep our lads from picking and stealing; but, had
there been a thousand of them, all with the eyes of lynxes, this would
have been impossible. I heard that a private of the Company's Foot
Artillery passed the very noses of the prize-agents, with five hundred
gold mohurs (sterling £1,000) in his hat or cap. Several of the men,
when the troops got beyond the power of the prize-committee, boasted of
their plunder; and, indeed, it is not much to be wondered at that men
should make so free as to help themselves, when the dreadful
metamorphosis that prize-money always goes through before it reaches the
pockets of the captors, and the length of time before it is paid, are
considered. All prize property is liable to many diseases and changes,
incidental perhaps to the climate of India. When first taken, it shines
in the full vigour of habit--is of good solid substance--of solidity of
body--current, pure and clear; but in bulk rather protuberant and gross,
and therefore, perhaps, somewhat inclined to be dropsical. Change of
situation is in general resorted to; but the disease has taken fatal
root, and nothing can eradicate the distemper but reduction of the
system. Having been severely drained, and much inflammatory matter
having been expressed, symptoms of decline but too often follow, and the
poor sufferer is left but a shadow, if it escape total extinction. In
this manner the solid substance extracted from the fort of Hattrass
dwindled away, leaving, however, a residue of some £20,000, of which I
pocketed eighty-six rupees; but as I had sold my share for two hundred,
I may be said to have come off tolerably well. We afterwards learned,
from undoubted authority, that immense treasures had been conveyed from
Hattrass. The rajah, aware that he had fallen under the displeasure of
the government, had the precaution to send his principal treasures away,
as also the greater part of his family. This treasure passed through the
city of Agra, the rajah having solicited the civil authorities to permit
the female part of his family to pass through that district to some
distant festival. As the rajah was an ally, this request could not be
refused; and, accordingly, from twenty to twenty-four ruts, containing
the treasures of that potentate, as well as his family, passed through
Agra, to a place of safety.

The station now began to be gay, and nothing but parties, dinners,
balls, suppers, &c., were the order of the day. This routine of gaiety
and festivity was kept up for a considerable time, until the more active
minds began to tire of it. In addition to this, our purses began to
exhibit symptoms of an attack of their old complaints. Mine, in
particular, had had such a regular and confirmed shaking-fit, that the
disease threatened to be vital, unless some immediate remedy was
applied.

The most noble the Marquis of Hastings was on his way up the river to
this station. The object of his voyage up the country was quite secret.
Strange were the surmises, and many of them as ridiculous as they were
strange. Some said Scindia was to be attacked--others, Bhurtpore. His
lordship was very particular and minute in the inspection of the troops
of the upper provinces. The 87th regiment were in excellent order for
service, and I longed to see them as a body again in the field. The
noble marquis was as hospitable as majestic: dinners and drawing-rooms
were now all the go at Cawnpore, and quite astonished the natives. His
lordship's manners were truly winning and devoid of pride. At his
parties he generally selected the greatest strangers to sit next him at
dinner, and was to all extremely affable and condescending. Thus passed
the time till the August following, when his lordship's grand scheme for
the annihilation of the Pindarees was published, and set us all on the
stir. Every one was as busy as trunk-makers, preparing. On every face
was the smile of joy, except on those of affectionate wives, whose
anxieties foreboded numberless ills that were never realized, and
sorrows that never came. Farewell dinners passed in all directions; and,
to wind up the farewell to each other, a station amateur play concluded
the festivities. I played Lord Duberley in the "Heir-at-Law," and Lord
Minikin in "Bon Ton." His lordship seemed highly amused with these
performances, and was pleased to pass some eulogiums on my Lord
Duberley. When the play had concluded, a gentleman came into the
dressing-room, and addressed me thus: "Shipp, if you act your part as
baggage-master, as you have that of Lord Duberley, you will do well."

"Baggage-master!" I replied, "I don't understand you."--"Why," said he,
"you are appointed baggage-master to the left division of the grand
army."

"My dear Sir," said I, "you must be mistaken; for I have not heard a
syllable of the matter." He replied, "You may depend upon it as a fact;
and, to be candid with you, I went to Lord Hastings and asked him for
the appointment, when he himself told me you were already appointed, at
the especial request and wish of Major-General Marshall, in
consideration of your conduct at Hattrass, and of your being the only
officer wounded during that siege."

Had I known this good news before, I would have thrown all the life and
soul of a baggage-master into the character of Lord Duberley. As it was,
no intelligence could be more welcome to me. On the following morning I
wrote to the brigade-major to know if the information was true. He
replied by note that it was, and apologized for having, through
multiplicity of business, forgotten to mention to me that I must join
the left division of the grand army forthwith. They had left Cawnpore
two days before. Being now sure of this good news, I communicated it to
my wife, and fixed the following day for my departure. I then waited on
the noble marquis, to thank him for my preferment. His lordship received
me with great kindness. "Mr. Shipp," said he, "you have no occasion to
thank me, but your own merit, and the kindness of Major-General
Marshall, who requested the appointment of me as a favour conferred on
him." His lordship concluded, "I will not ask you to dine to-day, as you
would in all probability prefer spending the short time you have to
spare with your family." I expressed my grateful sense of his lordship's
kindness, and returned home and spent the day with her whom I loved best
on earth. In the evening I took leave of my brother officers, and on the
following morning, ere the cock crew, I had taken an early breakfast,
and by the time the sun left his slumbering couch I was some miles on my
road, to join the left division of the grand army.

There is a kind of pensiveness by which the human mind is assailed on
separating, though for a short time only, from pleasant acquaintances;
but, when we part from objects bound to us by the dearest ties of love
or consanguinity, an indescribable weight oppresses the heart. I felt
this in parting from the most affectionate of women, to enter on a new
series of wars, perhaps never to behold her again. These thoughts will
intrude, in spite of all one's efforts to repress them, where the heart
feels assured of reciprocal love. If I do not deceive myself, or my
recollection fail me not, I was weak enough to weep on this occasion;
for who could see the wife of his bosom writhing with anguish and
clinging round his neck, whispering sweet words of love and constancy,
and refrain from tears? She had two little sisters, too, who hung about
my knees, crying, "Dear brother, do not go; see how sister cries. Pray
do not go; sister will be ill." I tore myself from the endearing
embraces which restrained me, and rushed out of the house.

[Illustration]

FOOTNOTES:

[15] Travelling by dawk is a very speedy mode of conveyance, well known
in India. The traveller is carried in a palanquin by eight bearers, who
are relieved every ten miles; and by this arrangement a hundred miles
are so certainly performed in twenty-four hours, that from Cawnpore to
Calcutta, a distance of eight hundred miles, is reckoned an eight days'
journey.




CHAPTER XVII.


The whole combined powers of the three Presidencies of India were now in
motion, to effect the dispersion or annihilation of the Pindarees, a set
of despotic marauders and savage barbarians, who were prowling about the
country in immense hordes. Their numbers might be estimated at two
hundred thousand, all horsemen, the remains of the old Mahratta sect of
warriors, who had been driven from their homes by the civil wars of the
several native powers of Hindostan. These marauders levied their
exactions from the poor peasantry of the more remote districts of
Hindostan, whom they robbed and plundered year after year; and murder is
a common incident of the day. The horses on which they ride, and also
their equipments, whether stolen or not, are the rider's own property,
and respected by the rest as such. The craftiest and most daring among
them are the greatest men, and call themselves, according to their
several degrees of superiority, names of high office, such as those of
our native officers of cavalry. Their weapons generally consist of a
long spear, a sabre, a shield, and a matchlock; but many of them have
pistols also, and some few I have seen with huge blunderbusses. Their
families generally accompany them, and they are mounted on the best and
fleetest horses. Should any of their women die or run away, they can
easily be replaced at the next village. If any resistance is made,
either on the part of the female herself, or of her father, mother, or
husband, coercive means are unhesitatingly resorted to, and the poor
creature is carried off in the same manner as any other commodity of
which they may stand in need. As soon as they have drained one town or
village, they take up their quarters in another, living entirely upon
rapine and plunder.

In this manner these marauders had long prowled about uncontrolled,
laying whole districts waste, and bringing with them, wherever they
went, desolation and ruin. These desperadoes, who set the laws of the
land at defiance, and the laws of humanity at naught, the Marquis of
Hastings was now determined to destroy; for which purpose, every soldier
that could be spared was now in the field, the noble marquis commanding
in person the centre division of the army, and superintending and
directing the whole plan of the war.

In four days I reached the division, then lying under the fort of
Callenger, and reported myself to Major-General Marshall, commanding the
division, with whom I breakfasted. His extremely kind manner of
receiving me was truly flattering. I cannot say that I was very bashful,
but I always endeavoured to be respectful to my superiors. I took the
earliest opportunity of expressing my acknowledgments for his kind
recommendation of me to his excellency the commander-in-chief. The
general replied, "Shipp, you deserve what you have been appointed to. I
have not forgotten your gallantry at Hattrass, although I was so
extremely ill before that place; but I must confess that plaguy gout
almost made me overlook your merit. I heartily wish you joy. There will
be a knife and fork always laid at my table for you. Make my board your
home." Thus saying, he shook me cordially by the hand.

I had now been told in person, both by the Marquis of Hastings and by
the general in command of the division of the army in which I was now to
act, that I had hitherto performed my duty like a brave and loyal
soldier. These attestations to my military character and conduct caused
my heart to glow with pride and satisfaction; and, indeed, nothing can
be more gratifying to the feelings of a soldier than the consciousness
that the approbation with which his superiors are pleased to regard him
has been really deserved by him, on account of his ardent attachment to
his profession, and his faithful performance of its perilous duties. It
was with heartfelt pleasure that I heard I had earned the good opinion
of men of high rank and command; and I felt highly gratified in the
contemplation that, when retired from scenes of war, I could add to the
enjoyments of the domestic circle the comfort of being able to look on
my former life with satisfaction, and of fighting my battles over again
and again with delight. Glory had been my motto; laurels were my crown!

I then paid my respects to Brigadier-General Watson, C.B., colonel of
his Majesty's 14th regiment, second in command of this division, whose
cordiality and hospitality, for nearly a year that I was a constant
guest at his table, I can never forget. After wishing me joy of my
appointment, he said, "Shipp, as you are the only king's officer in this
camp besides myself and staff, I hope you will take a seat at my table
during the campaign." This hospitality I could not accept, the
commanding officer having previously given me the same invitation; but
the brigadier-general would take no excuse, but said he would settle
that with General Marshall. I lived with him till the month of May
following, in a most friendly manner, faring at his board in a very
sumptuous style. In his private character, General Watson was generous,
kind, and affable, and ever ready to do a good act; and in his public
capacity a brave, active, and zealous officer, who seldom contented
himself with directing things to be done, but actually saw them
executed. From the extreme indisposition of the major-general, he
undertook the more active parts of the several storms and sieges in
which the left division was engaged, as the continuation of my narrative
will show.

On the following day I visited the strong hill fort of Callenger. It is
situated on an immense hill, on the ascent of which the greater part of
the town stands. At the extremity of this ascent, the rocks are almost
perpendicular. In some places they are fifty and sixty feet high. On
these are built prodigious bastions and stone walls, with embrasures and
loop-holes, so that any approach by assault or escalade was impossible.
On its summit is a beautiful tank of clear water, nourished by a crystal
spring. There are also fields, gardens, and woods, and two or three
temples or mosques. The view from this elevation embraced an expanse of
some miles of country. In its front, or more prominent part, lay the
lowlands of the station of Banda, on the most beautiful and clear stream
in Hindostan, the river Cane. This beautiful stream empties itself into
the Jumna, about sixteen or twenty miles from this station. Between us
and Banda stood some enormous hills; and temples were built on their
very pinnacles, which are reached by winding steps, cut out of the rock
by manual labour. These buildings, viewed from the base of the hills,
look like little white spots in the sky.

When the sun arose on the following morning, I was invited to go up and
witness the splendour of the scene; and I had no cause to regret such an
invitation. The morning clouds seemed to slumber on the tops of those
barren hills; but the rising sun's glittering beams roused them from
their lethargy, and drove them from their thrones of night. Even at
mid-day, I have seen the buildings on these hills entombed in the murky
clouds, and their inmates, when visible, seemed beings of another world.
They were Brahmin mendicants, who descended in the morning, and
solicited alms all day in the name of Alla, re-ascending at eve to their
aerial abodes, there to mumble forth their witchcrafts, and to
contaminate the salubrious breeze of night with their invocations to
blocks and stones. The breeze in these valleys is pure, renovating, and
salubrious. Pea-fowls are seen in great abundance on these hills. They
are both fed and worshipped by the mendicant priests, who are much
annoyed if you disturb or shoot them, which, notwithstanding that,
Europeans take the liberty of doing, wherever they can find them. These
birds are, while young, as delicious as a young turkey. In former days,
even during my time in India, shooting peacocks was strictly prohibited
by the government, as interfering with the religious rites of the
natives; but those orders or prohibitions have been long since
rescinded, and they are now considered fair game. They are found in
almost all the districts of Hindostan. Their plumage is splendid and
beautiful, and, when parading before the sons of idolatry, who worship
them, they seem as proud of their tails as the priests themselves do of
their pretended and presumptuous knowledge of futurity.

By their ridiculous predictions of futurity these wretches live, and
impose on the deluded villagers, whom they buoy up with the most
felicitous prospects to come, feeding their fancies with the hope of
future aggrandizement and wealth. Such is the confidence of the
uninformed villagers in these promises of future bliss, that they will
part with their all to insure a favourable prediction; but, when the
auspicious and long-watched-for period arrives at which their hopes are
to be realized, then they see how they have been deceived and robbed.
But the miscreant priest has always a loophole to creep out at, either
by asserting that his dupes have not dedicated a sufficient portion of
their property to the priesthood; that it is necessary for them to do
penance so many days; or give so much money, so much corn, and so many
pieces of cloth to the priesthood, to enable them to invoke their gods
for the promised mercies. This is frequently complied with, and the
delusion goes on from one imposition and infatuation to another.

This is the description of the people inhabiting those beautiful
mountains, on which the eye could dwell, and always find something new
to feast on. This very fort of Callenger had, but a short time before,
been stained with the purple stream flowing from Christian bosoms. It
was in the storming of this fort, that his Majesty's 53rd regiment of
Foot suffered so severely before they succeeded in planting Old
England's banner on its proud top. On the summit of the edifice is a
monument, which was erected to the memory of the brave fellows who fell
in the assault of this place.

We remained here three or four days, visiting this fort; and the oftener
we went up, the more we were astonished how it was possible our troops
could have got in on the occasion alluded to. To us who merely journeyed
for amusement up its stupendous sides, the ascent was most difficult,
and by the time we had gained its summit we were exhausted. That a fort
like that of Callenger, often attempted by legions of native armies,
should have been taken as it was, was matter of amazement to all who
beheld it. It had once, we understood, been taken by stratagem in the
following manner. A native rajah, who was going to war, solicited the
governor's permission to lodge his treasures and family there as a place
of security during the war. The governor, no doubt actuated by the hope
of the ultimate possession of the treasures, readily granted the
required asylum, for which purpose a hundred doolies, or covered
palanquins, were to be sent up on the following morning. The infatuated
and blinded governor, his soul burning with the prospect of gain,
slumbered on his couch of supposed safety. Each of these palanquins was
to be permitted to carry one female belonging to the rajah's family;
but, instead, each in reality contained a soldier dressed in the
habiliments of the female sex, and veiled to hide his huge moustaches.
To each of those doolies were eight bearers; in the palanquins were
their arms, hidden from view. Those hundred doolies went up without the
slightest suspicion, and they were ranged around the governor's house.
The sequel may be readily guessed: no sooner were the supposed bearers
relieved of their loads than they flew to arms, and thus got possession
of the fort of Callenger.

The army being now formed and complete, with every requisite for a long
campaign, I put the implements of my office in lashing order. My post of
baggage-master being a situation which is, I believe, peculiar to India,
it may not be improper to state its duties, &c. He is a staff-officer, and,
when not employed in his particular department, is attached to the suite of
the commander of the division, as much as the commissary-general,
quartermaster-general, or any other staff-officer of the division. On
the line of march, he is held entirely responsible that neither men nor
baggage precede the column of march, and that they are on their proper
flank, which is regulated by the general orders of the day. If the
reader recollect what I before stated, that he may safely calculate ten
followers in a Bengal army to every fighting man, and when he is
informed that, according to calculations made in our camp, including the
several native contingents we had with us, our followers were not less
in number than eighty thousand, men, women, and children, some thirty
thousand of whom followed the army for what they could pick up, by fair
means or otherwise, my situation cannot be supposed to have been a
sinecure. It was truly one of great labour and activity. I had twenty
men belonging to a corps of local horse. These men were provided with
long whips, and placed at my disposal. To attempt to talk the numberless
camp-followers into obedience was quite out of the question; and,
therefore, these whips were for the purpose of lashing them into
something like discipline. To the great number of human beings I have
spoken of must be added fifty elephants, six hundred camels, five
thousand bullocks, five thousand horses, one thousand ponies, two
hundred goats, two hundred sheep, fifty ruts, one hundred palanquins,
one hundred dogs, and one hundred hackeries, or carts: presenting the
following total:--

    Fighting men                         8,000
    Camp-followers                      80,000
    Elephants                               50
    Camels                                 600
    Bullocks, horses, and tattoos       11,000
    Goats, sheep, and dogs                 500
    Palanquins, hackeries, and ruts        250

    Total.                             100,400

One hundred thousand four hundred were thus under my command, for the
movements of the whole of whom, men, animals, and vehicles (except
fighting men), I was responsible; and I am sure the reader will not
class me amongst cruel men if I was obliged to use the whip, where
obduracy and contempt of orders were frequent.

On the following morning we commenced our march; and I began the
functions of my new situation by impressing upon the minds of some of
the followers, that my arm was strong as well as the lash of my whip. I
found I was soon obliged to take other measures besides merely bellowing
to them; and in three days I had whipped the whole body into perfect
obedience, which saved me a tremendous deal of labour afterwards, and
some hundred yards of whip-cord. Sometimes some mischievous fellows
would, to annoy me, get the whole baggage on the wrong flank; but I had
influence enough to find them out, when they paid dearly for their
trick. After a short time they found it would not do; so, my situation,
instead of a task, was at last a pleasure to me; and the sight of my
whip was sufficient to deter the most desperate from exceeding his
limits. My commanding officer frequently said that, if he lived and
commanded twenty armies, I should be his baggage-master.

In two days we arrived under the town and fort of Hedjeeghur, a strong
hill fort, that had been recently taken by the Honourable Company's
army. The refractory rajah, driven from his strong and proud walled
fort, lived in the town below, where no doubt he panted for vengeance
on his foes. He was a designing and crafty fellow, capable of the
blackest crimes; but he was so pressed under the thumb of the government
whom he had offended, that he dared not show himself in his true
colours. What must have been his heart's writhings, when he saw that
proud fort, which had been the residence and glory of his forefathers,
forfeited by the most diabolical breach of treaty! It must have filled
his cup of bitterness to the brim. In his disposition this conquered
rajah was cunning, cruel, and despotic; but, from fear, he was the most
cringing sycophant that ever lived.

The next march brought us to the foot of the ghaut we were to ascend. On
its projecting bosom could be seen a kind of winding path or road,
which, in some parts, seemed suspended from the clouds; and, how any
mortal power could get up our twenty-four pounders, and all their
gigantic appendages, seemed beyond human foresight to imagine. The
pioneers went to work with the view of enlarging the road; in which
occupation we will leave them, while I endeavour to describe the scene
below. I imagined that no spot on this wide earth could equal in beauty
the scene I beheld in Nepaul; but the one in which our encampment now
lay appeared to me almost to surpass it in magnificence. The hill, from
its base to its summit, was, I should think, a good English mile.
Similar hills surrounded the encampment, and rippling and creeping
streams wound through the camp in every direction. Here the trees,
closely embraced by the fragrant woodbine, were of an enormous size;
and, when in full leaf, their lofty tops vied with the encircling
mountains. Every kind of wild flower was here in great profusion, and
the grass under our feet was like the finest green carpet. The eye could
wander far through beautiful trees, and through their verdure could be
seen little huts of peace, standing by the brookside, which bespoke
domestic bliss. But here, as at Nepaul, stalked idolatry in all its
deformity, bidding defiance and evincing the most obdurate ingratitude
to the sole Author of such blessings. Oh! that in God's good time the
pure word of truth may flourish among this unenlightened race! May their
seed bloom in the blossom of faith, and may sweet anthems of praise
resound through their fertile valleys, and not only ascend to their
mountain-top, but to the throne of heaven!

I was delighted to find, by the orders of the day, that the army would
ascend the ghaut on the following morning; but that the baggage-master,
with one thousand men as a working party, would remain behind.
Immediately after the division had ascended, they were to follow,
permitting all private baggage to be got up in the best manner it could.
The working party which had been left below, was for the purpose of
getting up public stores. I was up early, and saw them off; and it was a
most terrific sight to see the cavalry hanging, apparently on the craggy
cliff. Strange to say, elephants ascended carrying up their usual
enormous loads; but the time occupied by these animals was considerable,
from their trying to step one after another, and never venturing without
first being well assured of the solidity of the ground. This reference
to the extraordinary sagacity of elephants reminds me of two or three
other anecdotes of these huge animals, which may be interesting to the
reader.

In the year 1804, when we were in pursuit of Holkar, there was, in our
encampment, a very large elephant, used for the purpose of carrying
tents for some of the European corps. It was the season in which they
become most unmanageable, and his legs were consequently loaded with
huge chains, and he was constantly watched by his keepers. By day he was
pretty passive, save when he saw one of his own species, when he roared
and became violent; and, during those moments of ungovernable frenzy, it
was dangerous for his keepers to approach him, or to irritate his
feelings by any epithets that might prove repugnant to him. On the
contrary, every endearing expression was used to soothe and appease him,
which, with promises of sweetmeats, sometimes succeeded with the most
turbulent to gain them to obedience, when coercive measures would have
roused them to the most desperate acts of violence. By night, their
extreme cunning told them that their keepers were not so watchful or
vigilant. The elephant here alluded to, one dark night broke from his
chains and ran wild through the encampment, driving men, women,
children, camels, horses, cows, and indeed everything that could move,
before him, and roaring and trumpeting with his trunk, which is, with
elephants, a sure sign of displeasure, and that their usual docility has
deserted them. Of course, no reasonable beings disputed the road he
chose to take. Those that did soon found themselves floored. To record
the mischief done by this infuriated animal in his nocturnal ramble,
would fill a greater space than I can afford for such matter. Suffice it
that, in his flight, followed by swordsmen and spearsmen shouting and
screaming, he pulled down tents, upset everything that impeded his
progress, wounded and injured many, and ultimately killed his keeper by
a blow from his trunk. He was speared in some twenty places, which only
infuriated him the more, and he struck away with his trunk at everything
before him. His roaring was terrific, and he frequently struck the
ground in indication of his rage. The instant he had struck his keeper,
and found he did not rise, he suddenly stopped, seemed concerned, looked
at him with the eye of pity, and stood riveted to the spot. He paused
for some seconds, then ran towards the place from whence he had broken
loose, and went quietly to his piquet, in front of which lay an infant,
about two years old, the daughter of the keeper whom he had killed. The
elephant seized the child round the waist as gently as its mother would,
lifted it from the ground, and caressed and fondled it for some time,
every beholder trembling for its safety, and expecting every moment it
would share the fate of its unfortunate father; but the sagacious
animal, having turned the child round three times, quietly laid it down
again, and drew some clothing over it that had fallen off. After this
it stood over the child, with its eyes fixed on it; and, if I did not
see the penitential tear steal from its eye, I have never seen it in my
life. He then submitted to be re-chained by some other keepers, stood
motionless and dejected, and seemed sensible that he had done a wrong he
could not repair. His dejection became more and more visible, as he
stood and gazed on the fatherless babe, who, from constant familiarities
with this elephant, seemed unintimidated, and played with its trunk.
From this moment the animal became passive and quiet, and always seemed
most delighted when the little orphan was within its sight. Often have I
gone with others of the camp to see him fondling his little adopted; but
there was a visible alteration in his health after his keeper's death,
and he fell away, and died at Cawnpore, six months afterwards; people
well acquainted with the history of the elephant, and who knew the
story, did not scruple to say, from fretting for his before favourite
keeper.

During the Nepaul war (1815) a female elephant, that had a young one
some seven years old, died, leaving its young to lament its loss. I went
to see it every day; and I pledge my word to the reader that the sorrow
and sighing of this little animal was truly piteous and distressing. For
some time it refused all kind of food. An old male elephant, that always
stood near its mother, after some days seemed to take pity on it,
fondled over and caressed it, and at last adopted it. It always
travelled on the line of march close by its side, would feed out of its
mouth, and gambolled with it as it was wont to do with its mother. Thus
noticed, it grew fast, and, ere the campaign was over, its poor mother
was forgotten, and all its affections seemed settled on its new friend.
Its name was Pearee--love, or lovely, in English.

Colonel James Price, now major-general in the Company's army, knew,
perhaps, more of the history of elephants than any man in India, having
been one of the Company's breeders, at Chittygong, for many years. I
have heard him recount the most affecting stories about these animals.
He generally kept two or three himself. I was tiffing one day with him,
when the subject turned on the sagacity of elephants, and he said he
thought he had a young one as cunning as any one he had ever seen; and
he offered to lay a bet, that if any one played this animal a trick, he
would return it, if it was a month afterwards. The company seemed to
doubt this, and the consequence was a small wager, taken by me. I cut
the elephant some bread, of which these animals are extremely fond, but
between the pieces I introduced a considerable quantity of cayenne
pepper. Thus highly seasoned, I gave this bread to the elephant; but he
soon discovered the trick, and I was obliged to run for it. I afterwards
gave him some bread without any pepper, which he ate and seemed grateful
for, and we parted. About a month or six weeks afterwards, I went to
dine with the same colonel, and, prior to dinner being served, we took
our usual walk to look at his stud. I had forgotten all about the
elephant and the bet I had made respecting him, and accordingly played
with and fondled him, without any suspicion. With this he seemed much
pleased at the time; but, on my going away, he drenched me from head to
foot with dirty water, in return for my cayenne pepper trick.

About mid-day, the whole of the private baggage was up, and some small
guns had been drawn up by the working party. By six o'clock, no one but
myself and the working party were remaining below. When I made my report
to the commandant of the division that everything was up, he could
scarcely credit my assertion; but when I assured him of its reality, he
thanked me in the most cordial manner, and said he had given the
following day for the completion of that job. The large guns took four
hundred men, with double and treble drag-ropes, to pull up; and some of
them were, in some of the most abrupt turnings in the ascent, actually
hanging by the ropes, in a very dangerous state. One gun broke from its
drag-ropes, but it was, fortunately, not far from a turning, which
brought it up without any accident. Indeed, scarcely an accident
happened worth the relation, save one, which I pledge my word was an
absolute fact. A small hackery, or cart, belonging to some of the
followers of the camp, fell down a precipice upwards of eighty yards
deep, the sides of which were studded with trees of an enormous size.
The two bullocks who drew this cart were dashed to pieces, and the
driver so dreadfully injured that he had scarcely a feature left that
could be recognized as human. Some ten feet from the cart lay a child
about two years of age, perfectly uninjured, with the exception of one
slight bruise on its little knee. It was supposed that the cart did not
upset till at the bottom of the declivity, and that not until then did
the child fall out; but it was certainly one of those extraordinary
circumstances which sometimes happen, for which it would be difficult
satisfactorily to account.

[Illustration]

[Illustration]




CHAPTER XVIII.


Having made my report that the whole of the stores, baggage, &c, had
been safely got up the ghaut, I was still at the general's, when a
messenger came from Rajah Buckeet Bellee, the rajah of Hadjepore, whom I
have before alluded to; and the general requested I would escort him
into camp. I therefore rode towards the top of the ghaut, where I found
the rajah in waiting. The purpose of his visit was to make his peace
with the general, who was much displeased at his not having complied
with his requisition to furnish five hundred workmen to assist us to get
up the baggage. The rajah had with him five elephants, and twenty
horsemen, with spears, guns, &c. He was inclined to be affable and
jocular with me; but I could see through his dark eyebrows the more
inward workings of his heart. He broke silence by asking me if the
general was displeased with him. Knowing the character of the fellow, I
could hardly make up my mind to be civil to him, so I replied, "You had
better put that question to him who can best answer it. If the general
is not offended, he has good reason to be so." He then asked me what was
the object of our campaign, and I told him that he had better reserve
all these questions for the ear of the general himself, who, no doubt,
would be able to satisfy his nawabship. Finding that I was not quite so
elated with the honour of sitting on the same elephant with him, as he
had expected I should be, and that he could get no information out of
me, the rajah next admired my dress, and took a mighty fancy to my
watch, but I would not let it out of my hand. He winked to a man on
another elephant, and muttered something in the Mahratta language, which
I did not thoroughly comprehend, but which sounded something like, "it
won't do," or "he won't do." He then took a fancy to my whip, which I
permitted him to look at. Some person happening to speak to me just as
we arrived in the precincts of the camp, my whip was passed from one to
another, and all protested they knew nothing about it; so that I had but
little hope of ever seeing it again. On the rajah's, return from the
general, from whom he had met but a cool reception, he remounted his
elephant, with indignation in his eye, and vowing vengeance, if ever in
his power, against all Europeans. I had to see him out of the camp,
when, having proceeded to the extent of my orders, I demanded my whip,
protesting that he should be detained in camp until it was restored.
Every search was made, but no whip was to be found. I was not to be
hoaxed in this manner, so I persisted in having either my emblem of
office returned, or its full value paid to me. The nawab asked what it
cost. I said five gold mohurs; and, after some demur, and a good deal of
parleying, I pocketed that sum, and we parted, to my perfect
satisfaction.

We marched the following day. Our journey lay through a wild country, in
which scarcely a human being was to be seen, though the soil seemed good
and fertile. The fact was, that we were now entering those districts
which had been recently the haunts of the Pindarees. The next day our
march lay through a famous diamond country, belonging to the Punnah
rajah. Having passed a small deserted stone fort, I was much astonished
that, after the enormous ascent of nearly a mile, the whole country
continued flat for a considerable distance. From the country having been
deserted in consequence of the ravages of the Pindarees, all appeared
desolate and dreary, except in the district in which the diamond
speculation was carried on. Here were seen, in little groups,
adventurers digging for these precious stones. In this venture, as in
all others, some won and others lost; but the number of the latter
greatly predominated. The adventurers purchase a certain extent of
ground, say ten or twelve feet square, for which they pay from a hundred
to a thousand rupees, which depends entirely on the situation. Terms
having been agreed upon, they then dig, sift, and wash, and if they find
any diamonds under a certain value, they are their own; if above (I
think ten thousand rupees is the amount stipulated), they are the
property of the rajah. Few of very high value are found; but,
notwithstanding this, the speculators are well watched during the whole
of their sifting and washing. A good deal of gold, silver, copper, and
iron is also found in this part of the country, and there can be no
doubt that the rajah is a rich man; though, notwithstanding his
treasures, he must be devoid of happiness, as the following incident of
his life will prove.

Some three years before the time that the division of the army to which
I belonged passed through this district, the rajah had married a most
beautiful woman, the daughter of a neighbouring rajah, making his third
wife. This woman, of all his wives and concubines, he most loved, if
such a tyrant can be supposed to be susceptible of such a feeling. In
his court he had promoted a young man (his barber) from an indigent
sphere to be his chief confidant. This confidant became his greatest
favourite, and, indeed, ruler. Nothing could be done but through his
interest. Thus things went on for some time, when the rajah was invited
some hundreds of miles to an annual festival, which invitation he
accepted. The times were turbulent, for the Pindarees were then roving
about in large bodies; but, notwithstanding all this, the rajah imagined
he could safely leave his confidant in charge of his family and his
people. Having made this arrangement, he started on his journey,
reposing the most implicit trust in the firmness and integrity of the
new minister--for so he was denominated. Scarcely had one week elapsed,
when the fiend, who was thus trusted, cast his sensual eye on the object
of his master's best love; but he found her virtuous as she was
beautiful. He protested his most ardent love, and that he could not
exist without her honeyed smiles; that she was everything that could
promote his happiness or destroy his life. He entreated, he conjured;
but all were as words cast upon the wintry blast: she was firm, and
threatened to expose his infamy to the rajah. Thus menaced, his crime
seemed to stagger him, and he importuned no more; all the exasperated
fury of an offended master rushed upon his mind. The rajah, as he well
knew, was of a most violent and ungovernable temper--one of those
unhappy mortals who act first and think afterwards; and such a report
against his favourite would have wrought his jealous heart to a pitch of
utter frenzy. The villain, seeing his danger, immediately turned his own
dastardly crime upon her who had resisted his corrupt proposals, and,
seeking an interview with the rajah on his return, he represented to
him, clothed with the most infamous and plausible falsehoods, that his
favourite wife had been unfaithful in his absence. Had the infuriated
and jealous-hearted rajah but given this report one instant of
consideration, he must have detected the wretch in his infamous
falsehood; but the artful favourite knew and relied on his master's
fury. The moment he whispered the poisonous words into his ears, the
rajah grasped his sabre, flew like a madman into the zenanah, and
without speaking one word, he cut his favourite mistress into pieces;
then, gazing on the murdered beauty who lay lifeless at his feet, he
sought refuge in the bosom of him who had destroyed his peace of mind,
and the object of his most ardent attachment. Her lacerated body was
committed to the pile, and burnt, after the usual lamentations. He was
an independent rajah, and, consequently, beyond the reach of British
justice. In his own country there was no law to punish such offences. In
a short time, therefore, the circumstance passed away, and was
forgotten; and not even did the relatives of the poor woman inquire the
cause of the foul act, for murder was a common incident of the day.

At length, one of the other wives of the rajah lay on her death-bed. In
this state, she expressed a wish that her whole court might be
assembled, for she had something of the greatest importance to disclose,
before she closed her earthly career. This was communicated to the
confidant, who immediately imagined that the murdered victim had
communicated to her the whole affair. He however took the necessary
measures to summon the court into the chamber of death; but, when they
had assembled, the favourite alone was missing, and, on search being
made, it was found he had fled on horseback. The council having
assembled, a full and clear disclosure of his infamous designs was made.
The rajah, in bitterest anguish, tore his hair, beat his breast, and ran
raving like a madman round the palace. Nothing could soothe or pacify
him. Every horseman was dispatched in pursuit of the delinquent, but he
was never found; and all the infuriated murderer could do, was to build
a temple to the memory of his favourite mistress. This he did, and a
most splendid edifice it is.

The unfortunate rajah, when I last saw him, which was in the year 1819,
was a perfect madman. After looking on his blood-stained hands, he would
wash them a hundred times a day; but neither water nor time can wash
away the guilt of murder. In the temple before alluded to is her effigy,
and two valuable diamonds occupy the place of her once smiling eyes.

We remained at Punnah some four or five days, waiting for instructions
from head-quarters. The left division was originally intended as an army
of observation, to watch the several ghauts on the frontiers of our
provinces, and to prevent the Pindarees from getting into our districts;
but they having taken another direction towards Candish, we received
orders to move on in the combined and general pursuit, and we stood
towards Serronge Bopaul and Burrowah Saugar, through a most wild and
desolate country, where tyrannic sway had driven far from their homes
the poor villagers. At one time, having lost sight of the Pindarees, we
began to be seriously alarmed about our families at the different
stations. At one of the principal stations (Cawnpore) there was scarcely
a soldier to be seen, and reports having reached them that the Pindarees
had descended the ghauts, the alarm of the women and their families
became dreadful. Their doors were barricaded with stones, bricks,
tables, chairs, drawers, beds, and so forth, and not one dared to
venture abroad. All was fear and consternation. Servants were dispatched
for information, who brought back the most unfounded reports, which
greatly increased their alarm. My wife's letters were filled with fears
and forebodings. Many ladies had hired boats for the purpose of going
down the river to a more secure place, when an event happened that, for
a time, confirmed all their alarms, and almost frightened them out of
their wits. A lady of the station, riding out early in her chair, or
_tonjon_, saw, on the race-course, an immense dust, raised by a number
of bullocks which were coming to the cantonment for grain, escorted by a
party of local horse. She inquired who these were, when the person of
whom she asked this question said "Brinjarree," meaning a small cattle
that carry commissariat stores; but the lady understood him Pindaree,
and the name was quite sufficient. She jumped out of her palanquin and
ran towards home, screaming, "Pindarees, Pindarees!" and all she could
answer to the questions put to her was, that the Pindarees were come,
and were already in the cantonment. Servants were dispatched, who,
seeing everybody running, vociferating "Pindarees," the alarm, as may
well be supposed, spread like wildfire. Some took to their boats; some
got under their beds; others into their cellars and go-downs; and the
consternation was unbounded. My wife, fortunately, had a small guard of
sepoys at her house, there being some commissariat stores there. On the
news reaching her, her doors were locked and bolted, and a confidential
servant was dispatched to ascertain the nature and the extent of the
truth of the report. He returned, saying, that they were then plundering
the great bazaar. The screaming of ladies and children which ensued, and
the alarm of servants, beggars description; and it was not before
evening that confidence and peace were restored, by the kindness and
judicious interference of Captain Sissmore, the acting paymaster of the
station.

We pushed on towards Bersiah, where we found Major Logie, of the Bengal
Infantry, who had thought it advisable to stockade himself, for he had
with him a considerable quantity of treasure for Colonel Adam's
division. As the Pindarees were hovering about in large numbers, and a
large body of Scindia's horse seemed to eye the treasure with delight,
the major having only a few men, we found him on a small hill, well and
securely fortified. The day before our arrival, this enormous body of
Scindia's horse encamped close to the stockade, and in their manners
were extremely insolent to Major Logie; so much so, that he told them in
plain terms, if they did not move their quarters, he would fire on them;
and I do not know any man in the Company's army more likely to put his
threat in execution. It is true they were the troops of an ally, but
they were not to be trusted; and nothing but fear prevented them from
seizing the treasure under Major Logie's care. At this place we received
hourly information that the Pindarees were in the neighbourhood; but as
they were in tens and twenties, it would have been folly for us to have
gone in pursuit of them. Indeed, we might as well have attempted to
catch the falling stars. Such a pursuit could not have redounded to the
credit of the service, and it might probably have frightened and
dispersed them, which was not our object. We rather encouraged their
combining in large parties, that we might surprise and cut them up. With
this view we remained here some time, watching their movements. Here,
again, the munificence of the government of the East India Company was
evinced. Proclamations were published through every village, calling on
these marauders to become good subjects, offering to purchase their
horses and arms at a fair valuation, and to give them land and a free
pardon for all their former transgressions. Not one of these kind and
liberal proposals had they a right to expect; but their obdurate hearts
would not accept the proffered mercy, nor their indolent habits permit
them to think of cultivating the earth. It is supposed that during the
more inactive seasons of their lives, they will sleep from twelve to
fifteen hours out of the twenty-four; and the few hours that they are
awake are spent in rapine and sensual pleasures. There is no race of
people on God's earth more depraved and debauched than a Mussulman
Pindaree.

[Illustration]

[Illustration]




CHAPTER XIX.


During our long stay at Bersiah, we frequently went out on parties of
pleasure; and, as I had at this place nothing to do in my official
situation, I generally accompanied these little excursions. About
Bersiah the country was more fertile and beautiful than any part we had
passed through, and we had excellent shooting, from the royal tiger to
the royal snipe, without going a mile from camp. Thus we passed our
time, living pleasantly enough. At length we found that the Pindarees
had ascended another range of ghauts, and concentrated their forces at a
place called Beechy Taull. Towards this place we bent our course, the
extent of our daily marches being entirely regulated by the information
brought in by our spies. Our wild enemy were, for a time, stationary;
our marches were more regular; and they actually permitted us to
approach them, without moving their quarters; taking care, however, to
keep a wide and deep river between them and us, and an almost
inaccessible ghaut, from whence they could see such a distance round,
that our approach could be observed ten or fifteen miles off. When we
were within forty miles of this place, we made a forced march in the
morning, some twenty-two miles, through a thick woody country. Having
completed this distance, we halted for our cattle and followers; but we
started again when the moon rose, intending to surprise them by the
following morning's dawn. Our road, however, lay through a dense thick
wood, with a deep ditch or ravine every hundred paces, which we had so
much difficulty in getting our guns over, that, when the morning dawned,
we had not proceeded more than one-half of the distance, though we were
in sight of the ghaut, which was about eight miles ahead. In an hour and
a half after this, we reached and crossed the river Scend, about two
miles from the top of the ghaut.

Our spies, who had just left the camp of the enemy, informed us that
they were not encamped on the top of the ghaut, there being no water
there, but that they were lying near a large lake of water, about two
miles from the ghaut, apparently unconscious of our approach. The
general immediately dispatched the 4th regiment of Native Cavalry, under
Brigadier-General Newberry, who commanded the whole of the cavalry, with
this division, also Cunningham's corps of Local Horse, under the command
of Lieutenant W.W. Turner, with two six-pounders, called gallopers, as
they would proceed as fast as the regiment could charge. I asked the
general's permission to go, and I obtained his consent to act on the
staff with Brigadier-General Newberry. The ghaut was high and difficult,
being nothing more than a mass of loose stones, by which many of the
poor horses broke their knees in getting up. As soon as we were up, we
formed an extended line, and moved on slowly, as our horses had then
been ten hours saddled, and without food. At the camp described we found
a large body drawn up, and we gave them several long shots, and brought
some of their spirited steeds and men a pitch lower. We then went off at
a good smart gallop; but our long-jaded and hungry horses had but little
chance. We soon emerged from the thick wood which surrounded their
enormous encampment, and came up with some of them, and cut them up.
About a mile to our left, and in our front, we could see tremendous
volumes of dust; and, about a mile further on, we began to fall in with
the enemy in considerable numbers. Some of them fought well and bravely:
indeed, the greatest coward, when his life is at stake, will fight
desperately, and this was the case with these marauders; but their
struggle was ineffectual. We could see women riding across the country
at speed, with one child on their backs, and one before them. Their
horses flew along the plain with extraordinary rapidity.

Having gone about four or five miles, some few of the Pindarees formed,
and seemed inclined to come to the scratch; but, before we could reach
them, their hearts failed them, and they rode off, passing upon the
gentlemen with the white faces some unpleasant epithets, which decency
forbids me to mention. The declining sun had already dipped his golden
beams in the distant lake, and bid us speed while yet he tarried. We had
some hours of day remaining, and by the close of the evening we cut up
numbers of them. At this time Lieutenant Turner's corps of Local Horse
had separated themselves from the 4th Cavalry; and, before it was dark,
the brigadier wished them to rejoin him, for the whole of the enemy's
baggage was in sight. I was dispatched for the purpose of delivering the
general's communications and wishes. When about half way on my road on
this duty, I found that a number of straggling Pindarees were prowling
about, some of them wounded; and, in riding over the ground again, it
was evident to me that we had not been idle. Lieutenant Turner and his
corps of Local Horse had also done the state good service. I was riding
at speed to deliver my orders, when, from behind a large tree, a
Pindaree had the impudence to discharge his matchlock in my very teeth;
but the ball missed me. I had before this bent my faithful friend, the
24th Dragoon sabre, nearly double, by striking at the thick
cotton-stuffed coats of the Pindarees; but, in the course of the battle,
I had seized a large spear of one of the enemy, of which weapon I well
knew the use, having been taught by one of the first spearsmen in the
country--the zemindar of the elephants during the sieges of Bhurtpore
and other places. In the moment of forgetfulness and irritation I threw
away my sabre, and was resolved to chastise the Pin for firing at me, in
his own way; so I ran at him with the spear laid across the first joint
of my left arm, with the butt under my right arm. For a time he parried
it, but at last I ran it into his neck, and I rode round him something
like a brickmaker's horse going round, and twisted him completely off
his horse. He soon fell, and, as I could see some of his comrades coming
towards me, I rode off. I then began to regret having parted with my old
friend, the twenty-fourther, which had so often stood my friend in the
hour of peril; but this is man's ingratitude for services rendered.

I was some time before I could find Lieutenant Turner, the whole of
whose troops were engaged when I came up. When I had communicated the
brigadier-general's orders, they were reluctantly but promptly obeyed,
and we soon joined the 4th Cavalry, agreeably to the general's desire.

Having come up with the enemy's baggage, the night beginning to close
in, and our poor steeds being completely done up, we called a halt, to
refresh ourselves, and more especially our poor goaded horses, who were
so completely exhausted that we could not have proceeded another mile.
The baggage of the enemy consisted of horses, ponies, cows, bullocks,
goats, sheep, women, old men, and children, with their little all; and
that all was nothing more than their wearing-apparel, cooking-things,
&c. These people were only followers. None of their families were here,
except about a hundred of their wives, mounted on ponies. Round these
poor frightened creatures our gallant brigadier, more for their
protection from the villagers than for his own gain or security, placed
a considerable guard. I was immediately dispatched, with four horsemen,
back to the main division of the army, who had encamped on the top of
the ghaut, to communicate the purport of our little skirmishes. It was
no very pleasant thing to ride over a field of battle, groping my way
through the dark with only four men; but, as there was no remedy, it was
as well to do it cheerfully. I found the division had taken up the
enemy's position above the ghauts, where I arrived in safety, but
completely exhausted, as was also my thoroughbred mare. From the time I
mounted on the preceding night, it was twenty-four hours, in which time
I could not have gone less than eighty miles. From the violent
perspiration I was in, and the dust and powder with which I was covered,
when General Marshall saw me, he burst into a loud fit of laughter. No
poor dustman or sweep in London could have cut a more ridiculous figure;
which may account for the impudence of the man who fired at me from
behind the tree, who certainly must have taken me for some menial
servant who had stolen his master's clothes.

Having communicated my orders, my next object was the care of my
faithful horse. She looked the picture of woe, with her head almost down
to the ground, and she had lost one of her shoes. I had a groom who
prided himself on being a bit of a horse-doctor. My mare was a great
favourite with him, and he begged, as a most particular favour, that I
would leave the care of her entirely to him. Knowing his skill, I
consented, when, to my astonishment, he told my bearer to bring him some
warm water and half a bottle of brandy, with a little bran. He mixed the
whole together, milk warm, and gave it to the animal, who drank every
drop and neighed for more. This dose threw the mare into a violent
perspiration, and the groom then set to, with three other men, and
rubbed her well down with straw. She had not drank the warm mash long
before she lay down on some clean straw, which had been prepared for
her. The groom then commenced thumping her with his clenched fists all
over, and shampooing her, which she submitted to with apparent pleasure.
He then had her shoes removed and her feet pared and washed in warm
water, and wisped dry. After this he made her get up, and rubbed her
well over with his hands, and in one hour she looked as well as ever. He
then gave her another mash, and clothed her for the night, and she slept
well. On the following morning she was quite fresh. Having other
horses, I gave her a rest; but she was so frisky that I was obliged to
mount her before half the march was over.

The main body of the army was not able to reach the cavalry the next
day, the distance was so great; nor did they till a late hour on the
following day, when the property taken, such as cattle, &c., were sold
in the bazaar. On the succeeding day we moved on, but learned that the
hunted parties of the Pindarees had fallen into the hands of General
Donkin's division, with another portion of their baggage. Thus they were
handed from division to division. Such was the judicious plan of the
most noble the Marquis of Hastings, that, whichever way these marauders
turned, they were sure to fall into the hands of their enemies. Thus
harassed, they dispersed, in tens and twenties, all over the country,
when the country people took courage and made head against them, and
attacked them wherever they could find them; so that, at last, they
sought refuge in any little fort that would give them admittance.

Things being in this state, we were directed to proceed against the fort
of Dhamoony, a fort belonging to the Nagpore rajah, who had violated his
treaty with the company. The keeledar of this fort would not submit to
the proposals of the Company, but had received instructions from his
refractory master to fight the English while he had a man left. Before
we reached the fort, we understood that many of the Pindarees had
accepted the offers of the government; numbers had been cut up, and
others had flown to their homes, many of them in our provinces. Nothing
but small parties could be heard of, and these sought refuge in the
woods by day, and travelled towards their homes under cover of the
night. Passing over numberless little skirmishes, marches, and
countermarches, that would be tedious to detail, I shall leave the other
divisions of the army to pursue the Pindarees, and proceed to relate the
operations of that division with which my personal services stand
connected; previous to which, however, a brief sketch of the character
and mode of life of a Pindaree may not be unacceptable.

This predatory wanderer of the East, from the moment of his birth is
nursed in the lap of depravity, and is nurtured and fondled in a bosom
inured to cruelties and barbarities that would disgrace the wild savage
of the interior of benighted Africa. His sire, perhaps, a short moment
ere his birth, has imbrued his hands in the blood of innocence, or
buried his spear in the bosom of some infant virgin who would not
passively submit to his sensual embraces; and, peradventure, bears in
his hand some gold or silver ornament torn from her before unpolluted
bosom, with which he decks the body of his new-born babe. Should the
little urchin be permitted to live, he is schooled in the camp of
heartless assassins, mounted on horseback, and well instructed in the
system of plunder. Scarcely can the boy lisp his parent's name, ere he
is bedizened with his father's spoils. It often happens, however, that
these children are not permitted to trouble their parents long,
especially should they prove sickly or cross, in which case the father
makes little scruple of dispatching them outright. Indeed, by less cruel
parents these poor babes are thought but incumbrances to a flying and
marauding force, whose motto is rapine, where the arm of resistance dare
be put forth. When the boy attains five or six years of age, he bears
the blood-stained weapons of his calling, and is schooled in all the
intricacy and minutiæ of their predatory line of life. At the age of
from ten to fourteen, he will be found a proficient in all the cruelties
which are considered requisite qualities for his profession; and,
perhaps, ere he has completed his sixteenth year, rapine and murder mark
his youthful career, and he wanders through vast tracts of country
unmolested and uncontrolled. The greatest blessing ever bestowed on this
great nation, was the annihilation of those immense hordes of Pindarees,
in the years 1817 and 1818, under the auspices of the Marquis of
Hastings. They generally form themselves into small bodies, some six or
seven hundred in number, putting themselves under the direction of the
most daring and despotic of their sect, but one who is generally well
acquainted with the localities of the country where plunder is to be
had. The court paid to this fiend is disgusting beyond description. He
is a little king, reigning on the throne of cruelty and bloodshed. These
people take up their quarters in towns and in their vicinity, committing
every kind of imposition on the poor unprotected inhabitants, against
whom, should they prove refractory, in refusing them even the carrying
off of their daughters or wives, the most coercive measures are
unhesitatingly resorted to. On these occasions murder is not an uncommon
event. From the unrepressed excesses of these marauders previous to the
Pindaree war, their annual visitations were looked for and expected as a
matter of course, but were esteemed by the poor plundered sufferers as a
kind of pestilential visitation, which they had no power to avert,
though, no doubt, they one and all had the inclination. They never
remained long at a place; but, during their short sojourn, they would
commit acts that disgrace the name of man, and would deservedly attach
to them the designation of brutes and monsters. They are generally well
mounted, and equipped in all the tawdry habiliments of the East. They
are most debauched and profligate characters, and some of them have four
and five women each as followers of their fortunes. These women are
excellent horse-women, and can handle the matchlock or sabre with the
best of them. They drink, riot, and smoke, the whole night, and bask in
the sun during the day. Their weapons generally consist of a long
seventeen-feet spear, a matchlock, sabre, and pistols. Their horses,
also, are well trained and manageable; but, from a formidable foe they
will run like cowards, and hide themselves till the danger is over.
Should they be surprised by any British force, they will run, and on the
road plunder one another; which sometimes is attended with bloodshed.
These people seldom marry, but live together as long as they like one
another, and no longer. From the debauched habits of both sexes, they
are not long-lived. They make use of opium in large quantities. It is
generally used by them as a stimulus to rouse their languid spirits to a
state of hilarity. I have seen some of the women in a most piteous
state, from having taken this drug too freely; so stupefied that they
could not articulate a word.

These were the people that the government of India wisely annihilated,
in the years 1817 and 1818. "In the destruction," says Sir John Malcolm,
"of this predatory system, which was converting the finest provinces
into a wilderness, the British government has performed a splendid act
of justice, policy, and humanity, which fairly entitles it to be
regarded as a conservative and beneficent power, whose supremacy has
been the deliverance of the people. That system was the baleful dregs of
the exhausted military establishment of the Mohammedan dynasties; and it
succeeded to the wars of Aurungzebe, like pestilence after famine,
rioting in the exhaustion of the country."

After a long and tedious march, we reached the fort of Dhamoony. The
rightful and proper owner of this extraordinary fort was the rajah of
Nagpore. He had, but a short period before, been placed on the
throne--so termed by the Indians--that is, in possession of his
inheritance, and acknowledged by the British government as the rightful
possessor, and their ally, and protected and guarded in quiet dominion,
when he suddenly entered into a league with the peishwah of Poonah, to
destroy the English, in violation of good faith, and to the disregard of
a most solemn treaty. When the Company were guarding and protecting this
treacherous rajah, he was harbouring in his bosom a plot of the most
base ingratitude. Such had been the secrecy with which he carried on his
intrigues with the peishwah, that a little band of British troops was
completely surrounded by fifty or sixty thousand horse, before the
Company were aware of his diabolical treachery. Our troops, in this
desperate situation, consisted of one regiment of native infantry, and a
few troops of the 5th regiment of Bengal native cavalry, in all not
seven hundred men, with, I believe, two six-pounders, against fifty or
sixty thousand! What was to be done? To stand and be shot at would have
been the height of folly and madness; nor could they, under such heavy
fire and force, hope to reach any other place of safety. Captain
Fitzgerald, commanding, or second in command of the 6th cavalry,
proposed charging the enemy, and selling their lives as dearly as
possible, declaring that, if he could gain a small eminence on which
they had a few guns, he should not despair of keeping them off and
saving their lives. In this proposal he was seconded by Mr. Jenkins, the
British resident at the court of Nagpore. The brave soldiers one and all
consented, and, sword in hand, on they galloped, and actually cut their
way through that immense mass of horsemen; in time gained the hill; took
their guns, and turned them upon the enemy; and there maintained their
post till reinforcements arrived. This piece of gallantry saved the
lives of all the party, and places on the brows of that brave corps
laurels that never can fade--honours of which the iron hand of time
cannot rob them. I have frequently met the officer who commanded on this
occasion (Captain Fitzgerald) in company, and it is difficult to offend
him more than by mentioning this Nagpore affair, or attaching to him any
peculiar praise or merit. I once heard him say, very angrily, "D--n the
place--I wish I had never seen it; it's more plague to me, and oftener
sounded in my ears, than if I had turned coward and run away. If I am to
be pestered thus for having merely done my duty, the devil may fight
next time, for I won't." It is true that a soldier cannot do more than
his duty; every effort that he can make is due to his country, and
every nerve should be exerted to promote its glory. From my own career,
I am convinced that, where the danger is most imminent, the soul rises
in proportion in energy and courage to meet it. I have invariably found
it so myself, and I dare say that my feelings on these occasions are
similar to those of most other soldiers.

The fort of Dhamoony is built of stone, and is situated in a most
extraordinary place, and, as the people relate, was built on account of
the following remarkable circumstance. Some rajah was hunting in its
vicinity, when a hare got up and afforded excellent sport for a
considerable time, and ultimately attacked and killed one of the rajah's
bloodhounds. This singular circumstance induced him to erect the present
fort of Dhamoony. It literally stands in a hole, surrounded by a wild
and inaccessible jungle, and two of its sides resting on the steep
banks, or rocky heads, of a tremendous ditch or ravine, in some places a
hundred feet deep. Upon this stands the wall, some thirty or forty feet
high; and, to view one of the bastions from this excavation is really
terrific. On the front and other side there is scarcely any ditch; but
the entrance is through five gateways, each of these commanded by small
guns, and having small loop-holes for matchlocks.

The occupants of this fort actually fired at our advance, when nearly
three miles off; I suppose to let us know that they were resolved to
fight. We encamped about two miles from the small ridge of hills on
which we afterwards erected our breaching-battery. In three days
everything was ready, when the usual offer was made to them, as we did
not wish wantonly to spill human blood. They spurned the proffered
mercy; so to show them that we were in earnest, we commenced by giving
them a salvo from our twenty-four pounders, accompanied with three
cheers. They manfully returned both; and, from the show of heads upon
the wall, we imagined we should have a tough job, and began to think the
rajah's boast, that his fort was impregnable, not unfounded, for our
shots rebounded some hundred feet; at which the garrison laughed and
cheered most heartily. They little imagined what was in preparation for
them, and was soon to follow. In about an hour, we effectually disturbed
their merriment, and their turbans were seen flying in all directions
from our little whistling shrapnells. In five minutes not a soul could
be seen; but the screaming of women and children was dreadful. The first
day our balls seemed to have made little or no impression upon the wall;
but, on the following day, some large stones in the centre of the
bastion seemed tired of being battered, and began to shake, and in the
course of the morning two of them tumbled out, when an Irish sergeant of
the Company's Bengal Foot Artillery exclaimed to a corporal, "Corporal
Hogan! come here, joy; sure, we have knocked two of her teeth out at
last, and we'll soon bother her wig for her." The corporal replied, "Ah,
Paddy, that bastion comes down like sin."--"How is that, Hogan?" asked
the sergeant. "By degrees, to be sure," replied the corporal; "for, when
that once begins to come, faith! it tumbles on one by the hundreds."
Some of the enemy having heard the noise of the stones falling, a few of
them peeped their noses out to see what was the matter, and soon retired
again, impressed with a conviction that the prophecies of the
superstitious builder, as well as his boasted fort, would soon be
without a foundation. These fears were rational enough, for the bastion
began to give way in all directions. About one o'clock we expected our
grand shelling-battery to open, which must certainly have completed the
demolition of the fort, for our shells were of enormous calibre. About
this time we generally broke off firing, for the purpose of the men
getting their dinners; and this was the only time that the inmates of
the fort dared to show their noses. Many were now gazing on the falling
and dilapidated tower. Its top had giving warning of its being tired of
the contest, having found out that iron is harder than stone. I thought
I should like to take a nearer peep; so I asked Captain Cruikshank if
he would accompany me to take a nearer view of the fort, that we might
know what kind of ground we had to go over. I would advise all young
soldiers to ascertain this grand point, whenever they can do so without
risk of discovery or personal danger, that, when storming on dark
nights, they may know where to run, and where to walk. I need not say
that Captain Cruikshank, who was a most gallant officer, readily
assented to my proposal. We crept down within a hundred yards of the
bastion, and were so close, that we were observed peeping by those upon
the wall. One of them said, "Come on; do not be afraid; we will not fire
on you." This was repeated by several others, who stood on the walls. We
asked them what they wanted by inviting us to go nearer; and they told
us that, if we would cease firing, they would give up the fort. We
replied that, if they were really inclined to do so, we would come
nearer, and listen to their proposals and wishes. They swore most
positively it was the wish of the keeledar and garrison. For myself, I
scarcely thought that their oaths were to be trusted; but Captain
Cruikshank said, if I would go, he would; so I had no alternative left,
as, of course, after such an invitation, I could not say no. We
accordingly approached close to the bastion, and they faithfully
promised to surrender the fort, if we would cease firing. As we now felt
assured that they were in earnest, their wishes were promptly
communicated to the commander; and Brigadier-General Watson came down to
where we had been standing, when it was settled, that all the occupants
of the fort should be permitted to march out, with their families and
private property, but that they should lay down their arms. This they
readily assented to, and, as a pledge of their good faith, they
undertook to send out the keeledar immediately. Our occupying-party was
in readiness in the trenches. We, therefore, with the general,
quarter-master-general, and several others, with about twenty soldiers,
waited at the outer gate for the keeledar, who at last arrived, a poor
hoary-headed old man, who had been bound for proposing to give up the
fort before we commenced the siege. For having given utterance to such a
proposal, his mutinous troops had kept him confined till that moment.
When he was liberated, he looked the picture of misery and despair. His
white beard was clotted together from weeping, and he seemed almost
starved. We had given the garrison to understand that, if any treachery
was attempted, the governor's life should be the forfeit. At this
juncture, a most untoward circumstance occurred. An eight-mortar battery
erected in the village, being uninformed of this parley, opened their
new shelling fortification, to try the distance. The first shell fell
within five yards of General Watson's feet, and exploded; but, strange
to say, we all escaped. Another fell on the tree under which we were
standing, and another burst over our heads; but it miraculously happened
that no one was hurt. All was consternation. The poor old keeledar cried
out "Treachery!" and some few shots were fired from the garrison. I was
immediately dispatched towards our mortar-battery to stop their
proceedings; but I had not gone ten yards before a shell fell within
five paces of me. I immediately threw myself on my face, and hugged the
ground, and thus escaped. I am persuaded that, when the shell bursts, it
ascends a little, for I could hear the pieces buzzing over my head. The
danger being over, I again made the best use of my legs, when I met the
artillery-officer coming to see the effect of the shots which had been
fired, to judge of the distance for the next eight, which were all
ready. I was so completely out of breath that I could only say, "For
God's sake, stop your firing!"

The officer, alarmed at my appearance and manner, said, "What the devil
is the matter with you, Shipp?"--"Matter! my dear fellow," I replied;
"why, you have, I suppose, by this time killed the general,
quartermaster-general, and half the officers in camp." Hearing this he
set off at a gallop towards the fort, to see the extent of the mischief
he had done from his ignorance of the parley. I followed at a slow
trot, and was delighted to find that none of the shells, although eight
had been thrown, had done any other injury than frightening those whom
they came near. I can speak for myself, at all events; and I protest I
did not at all relish the idea of being shot by the shells of our own
batteries. There was something unnatural in this mode of making one's
exit; and, to tell the candid truth, I was terribly scared, and the
captain of the battery and I never got on such terms of intimacy again
as to be within shelling distance, as I was not fond of such combustible
acquaintances.

After I had stopped the shelling from our battery, and was thinking of
my miraculous escape, I was interrupted by an inquisitive sergeant; and,
as I always made it a point of attending civilly to every man who spoke
to me, I permitted him to go on. He addressed me as follows:--"Pray, was
your honour there when the first shell fell, for I was after laying that
self-same mortar?"

"Yes," said I, "and you nearly laid me in the grave."

"By the powers, but I should have been mighty sorry for that, your
honour."

I thanked him for his sorrow, but he continued following me towards the
scene of action, and at last again broke silence.

"Is all the fight over, your honour?"

I said, I hoped so.

"I hope not," replied he.

I told him I was pretty confident of it, as the enemy were willing to
give up the fort.

Hearing this, he coolly replied, "Then bad luck to them, after all the
trouble we have had in building and completing that sweet eight-gun
battery forenent yonder."

"Well, but my good fellow," I replied, "you cannot expect with reason
more than they have to give."

"I don't mane that, your honour; it's only so much time thrown away for
nothing, without getting any satisfaction for it; besides, your honour,
it is quite tantalizing to one's feelings; and a great big fight would
have been some kind of compensation."

"Supposing that, in that great big fight, you or I should have been
killed, sergeant?"

"By my conscience," said he, laughing loudly, "but that would have been
rather unpleasant, certainly."

"That would have been but a poor compensation for your trouble. What do
you think, sergeant?"

"Faith! your honour, I like short reckonings, and I do not like to work
for nothing."

Here we rejoined the party; he mixed in the general bustle, and I lost
sight of him. I afterwards saw the same man in the fort, and I pointed
out to him a poor woman whose legs had been shot off, but who still
carried her babe in her arms, saying, "Well, sergeant, I hope you are
now compensated for your trouble in the erection of your battery." He
turned his head to where I pointed, and said (I shall never forget his
pathetic manner), "By my conscience, your honour, if I had thought I
should ever have seen such a murderous sight, I would not have come near
the place." I saw him wipe the tear of sympathy from his eye with the
back of his hand, and he continued, "Shall I take the poor creature to
the hospital?"--"No, sergeant," replied I, "you would only increase her
pain." Almost immediately after this, the poor woman breathed her last
sigh. In her last struggle she grasped her child, and, even after death,
her cold eye rested on the features of her unconscious babe. We induced
another woman, whose child had been killed, to take charge of this. She
cheerfully consented; but whether the poor child really found in her a
second mother, I had no means of knowing.

All the outer gates of the fort were barricaded with huge piles of
stones, which we were obliged to remove before we could enter, and which
took up a considerable time. We had prepared everything, in case of
treachery, and we therefore marched in as if proceeding to storm.

As we entered, they threw open the gates; but there was a degree of
expressive fear on the face of every man in the fort, for they were
strangers to the principles of Europeans, and they judged them by their
own. Every man was ready, with his match lighted, resolved, as we were
afterwards given to understand, to sell their lives dearly, should we
prove treacherous. No sooner did we enter, than the eye instinctively
closed, on beholding the appalling scene before us. Terrified and
decrepit old men and women were in great numbers; and agonized mothers
were seen hugging their lifeless babes to their bosoms. Far and wide lay
strewed bodies and parts of bodies. Some young women bared their bosoms
to the pointed bayonets, calling upon our men either to kill them or
return their murdered babes and husbands. One young maiden screamed
bitterly for her father, who had been killed; and her last breath died
upon the breeze, for she fell, and expired in the arms of her aged
mother.

Having observed that we acted on the defensive only, and seemed rather
to sympathize with them in their griefs, the enemy gained confidence,
and left their elevated posts with apparent faith. They moved gradually
and slowly out, taking with them their little property unmolested. They
were pictures of the most abject misery and want. They had not received
any pay from their master, the rajah of Nagpore, for the long period of
two years, during which they had lived upon the produce of their
exactions from the villagers of the surrounding country. I would venture
to say that, out of fifteen hundred people, they had not a hundred
rupees amongst them; but, had they millions, it was guaranteed to them
by the word of faith which Britons had never broken in India. They
quietly grounded their arms as they came out one by one, accompanied by
their families. Some of them cast a last fond look at their sabres,
probably some family relic, and heaved a parting sigh. The surrounding
country being in a state of commotion, created by small parties of the
Pindarees flying towards their long-forsaken homes, and purloining
everything they came near on the road, our humane general permitted
every tenth man to keep his matchlock and sword, for self-preservation.
Under the dusk of the evening they moved towards their homes, and we
took possession of the fort, having lost but very few men during the
whole siege.

[Illustration]

[Illustration]




CHAPTER XX.


The property in the fort of Dhamoony was literally nothing. The whole
consisted of some five or six small guns, principally iron, and a
considerable quantity of grain; the produce of which, as well as what
was found in other forts taken during the campaign, was thrown into the
general fund. Here, for a time, a small detachment was left; but they
soon became so sickly, and died so fast, that we were obliged to
dismantle the place, and leave it to the ravages of time.

The poor keeledar was alone detained and held responsible for the
rebellion of his garrison. He was punished in a most exemplary manner by
our government, by being placed on eight rupees per diem, as a prisoner;
quite as much, I should imagine, as he got in a whole month as keeledar
of the fort of Dhamoony. The unbounded liberality of the East India
Company is quite unknown in England, and, indeed, in the more remote
parts even of Hindostan. Their munificence is proverbial among the whole
of the native powers with whom they have ever been concerned. Their
extreme liberality, and their good faith in all treaties, which has
never been tarnished, establish them in India on a rock which no power
can shake. Whatever treaty, whether commercial or political, is entered
into by them, it is as sure as that the sun will rise and the moon will
shine, that its terms will be strictly fulfilled. Whatever may be the
loss of such a treaty or bargain, its stipulations are adhered to to
the very letter. These are principles that have established the
Company's possessions in India on the firmest basis; and, aided by Old
England, she may now defy the combined power of all Europe. Her native
troops are good soldiers, and loyal and faithful subjects; but they
certainly require a little humouring. There are certain indulgences
which must be granted to them: the free exercise of their religious
rites; certain comforts, such as additional clothing, &c., during the
several seasons of the year; and by no means to attempt to induce them
to wear anything that is objected to by their several castes. However
absurd their habits may appear to a person unacquainted with Indian
affairs, they must be, to some extent, sanctioned. I am speaking, of
course, of things reasonable. I do not mean to say that, if a Hindoo
priest fancied himself a greater man than the bishop of Calcutta, his
lordship should resign his office in his favour; but simply that they
should be indulged in every way not inconsistent with prudence and
justice. I am persuaded that two or three millions of native troops
could, in the course of one year, be organized and fit for the field;
and I do not hesitate to affirm that, when headed by brave European
officers, and encouraged by the example of British gallantry, they would
be found equal to any troops in the world. I speak this from my own
experience in India, and from being constantly engaged on active service
with these troops. The Company have ever been justly conscious of the
importance of attending to the different sects of men admitted as
soldiers, selecting those of the higher class of Hindoos for their
infantry, and of the Mahometan castes for their cavalry. Whenever men of
inferior caste have crept in, little rebellions have been traced to that
source. I do not mean to say, that men of an inferior caste are not
equally brave soldiers; but I do maintain, the higher the caste or sect
of the native, the more he may be trusted, and the more likely he will
be to prove himself a faithful subject, as well as a good soldier.

Our division was now directed to proceed against another fort of the
Nagpore rajah's, called Gurrah Mundellah, to which we had to march some
two or three hundred miles, over hill and dale, cutting down mountains
and filling up rivers. Our march was, therefore, of course very tedious.
The government political agent, Major O'Brien, joined us at Jubblepore,
and we proceeded slowly towards the place of our destination. In some
parts of this country we were obliged to cut nearly our whole day's
march through underwood and ravines; and, in some places, such was the
impossibility of ascent over many of the hills, that it took a whole day
to cut a road so as to accomplish the next day's march through this wild
and desolate country; but some of the views in the openings were truly
splendid and beautiful. Everything that could please the eye or delight
the senses was to be found in this spot--the haunt of beasts of prey.
One of these little valleys reminded me of a scene in the "Arabian
Nights' Entertainments;" it was indeed a fairy land, to describe which I
am quite incompetent.

In this valley I arose about the hour of midnight, to view the
enchanting scene. The moon was of unclouded brightness, and far on its
western journey. Close beneath my tent was a clear and sweetly murmuring
stream, in which the moon dipped its silver wings, and its brilliant
rays shed so clear a light through the trees that I could see every
white tent around. Their inmates were all slumbering, lulled by the
gentle moaning of the lofty pine. Hushed was every tongue, calm was
every bosom, save those of one solitary mendicant priest at his midnight
prostrations. His little tinkling bell disturbed the serenity of the
night, and grated on my ear with discordance.

In three days more, after most tedious marches, we began to inhale the
same atmosphere as our enemy, and we were obliged to approach the
several ghauts with caution. The country that surrounded the large town
and fort against which we were advancing was terrifically wild; and, in
some parts, deep-sunk dells and excavations in the earth told us that
caution alone would insure success. In this fort, we had been given to
understand, a considerable body of the flying Pindarees had been
enlisted, to assist in defending the fort against the English, their
hated enemies. These we were resolved to make an example of;
consequently, a strict investment of the fort was our primary object, to
prevent their escape. For this purpose, Brigadier-General Watson, C.B.,
was dispatched with the cavalry and some few infantry. I accompanied
this party, and we commenced our march in the afternoon, working our way
through rivers, jungles, and over immense hills. A little after dark, on
passing a small hill a little on our left flank, two shots were fired at
us. The general dispatched a company of infantry to reconnoitre the spot
from whence the shots had proceeded. On examination, it proved to be a
small look-out of the enemy. We found several small cots or bedsteads
here, and their fires were still burning; but, after firing their two
shots, they must have immediately fled; and we were extremely obliged to
them for their hint, which reminded us of the necessity for caution.

We had gained information from our spies, that our road lay over a high
ghaut, on which the enemy had a strong piquet; that, when we had
surmounted that ghaut, the road to the fort of Gurrah Mundellah was over
lowlands interspersed with water; and that we should have to cross the
Nerbuddah, where we might expect to be opposed, as that river was wide,
deep, and stony. Acting upon this information, our brave brigadier
accompanied a small party, for the purpose of dislodging this piquet,
without giving them a shot at the whole division. We were a long time
ascending; so that, by the time we got up, the residue of the army were
at the bottom. The enemy heard them by the neighing of the horses and
the confounded clatter of our dragoons' swords, which may be heard for
miles. It would be much more musical if they would tie bells round the
horses' necks, than to tolerate this abominable noise. The moment the
piquet heard them, they fired, their long ginjalls, which kill a mile
off. The first shot wounded a poor grass-cutter of the 8th Native
Cavalry through the leg. At this time our detachment, which was stealing
up the side of the hill, was so close upon the enemy, that they had not
time to fire many more shots. They then ran off, leaving eight or ten of
their ginjalls suspended from branches of trees. At this place were ten
or twelve fires, and about twenty cots. Some of their rice was cooking;
but, for fear they might have poisoned it, we broke the utensils. The
ginjalls we also broke, not being able to carry them with us. We then
descended the hill; when the moon rose, and diffused her bright rays
over the distant plain. The sight was enchanting, in comparison with
prowling about in the pitchy darkness of the night, not knowing the
moment we might be saluted with a pound ball from one of their long
ginjalls. The corn-fields, the crops of which were then in a state of
maturity, looked silvery bright, and it was a great relief to the eye
that had been intensely watching in dreary darkness. Lighted torches, or
fires, could be seen on the distant hills, and those in the intermediate
space were, no doubt, indications to the fort, of our approach.

We halted on the banks of a sweet crystal brook, and drank of its
renovating stream. In about an hour we resumed our march on a tolerably
good road, but crossed by little rippling rills almost every half-mile,
which kept our feet continually damp and cold. We passed through many
rice-fields, and the country seemed fertile and cheerful, but not a man,
or even a solitary hut, could we discover. We at last saw a light,
apparently about a mile ahead of us. As we advanced, the light still
appeared in the same situation. Sometimes we imagined that it was borne
by some of the flying enemy, who had good reasons for keeping that
distance ahead of us; but we soon discovered the fallacious light to be
nothing more than the _ignis fatuus_ on its midnight rambles. Shortly
afterwards we came to a small village, consisting of about twenty huts;
but nothing was to be found here except a few Pariah dogs, and some
wandering cattle. Here we halted for the night, and handed round
biscuits and grog to those who had not had the precaution to provide
themselves with some refreshment. On similar occasions I had formerly
been negligent, and had often suffered the pangs of hunger through my
own neglect; but this evening, foreseeing, from the nature of the
country, that our supplies could not reach us, I had provided myself
with a whole bottle of brandy and a considerable quantity of biscuit,
which went freely round. The morning was very chilly, and we had no
covering; but, notwithstanding this, the weary bodies of the men soon
sank to sleep. My favourite mare had a blanket, which I would not
deprive her of, as she would not drink brandy. Her portion of biscuit
she had. When I awoke, what was my astonishment to see my groom wrapped
up in my mare's blanket, and snoring like a pig, while the poor mare
stood shrivelled up, and looking almost frozen to death. At this piece
of consummate impudence on the part of the groom, I lost my temper,
which nothing could restore but the satisfaction of giving the fellow a
good horsewhipping. Besides this, I made him forfeit one rupee of his
pay to purchase sweetmeats for the mare, to which she was exceedingly
partial. I made the groom feed her himself with this remunerative
luxury, and, to give the poor fellow his due, he did it good-naturedly
enough.

Soon after daybreak we again got on our way, but found that we were a
much greater distance from the fort than we had been led by our spies to
suppose. We now marched in full preparation to meet the enemy, assured
that they would not lose the fair opportunity of stopping our progress,
which was now afforded them. On our arrival at the spot where we
expected to meet with resistance, to view the wide roaring river, the
Nerbuddah, majestically rolling over its rocky bed, would alone have
been sufficient to stop the progress of soldiers less inured to
difficulties than we were. Had that river been defended, the forcing of
the passage would have cost us dearly in lives. The banks on the
opposite side were bold and abrupt; and the only accessible part for
wheel-carriages was a roadway that had been excavated from the sides of
the river. Had this ford been defended, or the road stopped, our passage
would have been attended with immense difficulty and danger; but we did
not see a single man, and we could form no other conclusion from such
apparent indifference to so advantageous a position, than that they had
occupied, and were resolved to defend, some place which they deemed more
suitable to their purpose. About a mile farther, we saw some unarmed
stragglers on the edge or margin of a wood, peeping at us. I rode after
one of this party, whom, when I came up, I found to be a woman. She
immediately threw herself on her knees, and begged for mercy, saying she
was a poor villager. When she saw that I had not the remotest intention
of injuring her, she afforded me every information I required; stating
that all the soldiers were in the fort and town, and that, until we got
there, we should fall in with none but poor and inoffensive people, who
were leaving the fort for their native homes. With a large party of this
kind we fell in, almost immediately afterwards. They were armed, and
drawn up in battle array; and nothing but the appearance of women and
children among them would have prevented our advance from firing on
them. From the fortunate circumstance that the poor woman with whom I
had fallen in, had informed me that some of the people that did not wish
to serve the rebel rajah had left the fort, the whole of this party was
permitted to pass without molestation, with commendations on their faith
to the British government. They departed, and we proceeded towards the
fort.

About a mile further on, from an eminence we could distinctly see the
town, with its thick and high walls, inside of which was a strong-built
stone fort. With a glass we could see people on the walls and bastions
in great numbers, and guns peeping from the embrasures, of enormous
size. When we were in complete view, they indulged us with a few
sixty-four pounders; so that we were obliged to give them a much wider
field. One of our guides stated that he had been in the fort, as a
mendicant priest, and we had no reason to question his veracity. He
produced a long sketch of the fortifications, strength, number of
troops, &c., that induced some timid ones to make their last wills, and
even impressed the more resolute with the idea that they had not a light
job before them. Guns were new-flinted, pistols reloaded, swords
fresh-pointed, and preparations were busily making on all sides, while
searching for a place called the Home Doongra, which was an eminence
that looked into the fort, at a distance of about two miles from their
centre bastion, and near which we intended to encamp. Whenever the enemy
saw our men collected on this height, they saluted us with long shots
from a gun of enormous size. Several smaller ones were also thrown, and
some of them were well directed. This is easily accounted for. I have
frequently found that, wherever there was good cannonading, the
golundauze gunners had been taught in the Company's army. I have no
doubt that many of our native gunners enter the Company's service in
those situations, as a preparatory step to entering the service of a
native prince or rajah in the same capacity. The gunners are the only
class of men in the service of these rajahs that are regularly paid. In
the Company's army, a sepoy, or other servant, can always leave, by
expressing his disinclination to continue in the service; and this great
indulgence is very often taken advantage of by well-drilled men, who
have been taught all the minutiæ of military evolutions, and are
probably proficients in gunnery. It is not an uncommon thing in native
armies, for persons of this description to get fifty or sixty rupees
per month, when other soldiers are glad to get four. In this fort were
three or four men, who had, in the manner I have described, acquired a
complete knowledge of gunnery, and were good shots. These men are so
highly extolled among their caste, that they will madly throw themselves
upon the bayonet, rather than desert the gun which they command. Two of
the golundauze in this fort were killed during the siege; the other
returned to his home, which was Allahabad.

This fort of the Nagpore rajah had rebelled. The rajah himself had
violated his treaty, and broken off his alliance with the Company. The
inhabitants of this fortress, a short period before we encamped before
it, had been summoned to evince their loyalty to the Company, to which
they readily consented. For this purpose, a small force consisting of
one regiment of Native Infantry, and some part of the 8th regiment of
Bengal Native Cavalry, under the command of Major O'Brien, of the latter
corps (then political agent for the arrangement of the country belonging
to the rebel and treacherous rajah of Nagpore), marched to occupy the
fort of Mundellah, which the governor had consented to give up. As soon,
however, as the garrison saw the detachment (a mere handful of men)
under the major, within gunshot of the fort, they fired on the party,
who were, of course, obliged to make a precipitate retreat.

Before this affair of Major O'Brien's, the moment the treacherous
intentions of the rajah had been detected, the British resident of
Nagpore ordered his person to be seized. For this purpose, Captain
Brown, of the Bengal Native Infantry, was dispatched, with troops, to
seize him. On the approach of this force, the rajah flew to his zenanah,
and sought protection amongst his concubines. At any other time, and
under any other circumstances, respect would have been shown to this
_sanctum_ of illicit pleasure; but, under the present circumstances of
the case, delicacy was quite out of the question, and the party rushed
in and seized him. The women in the zenanah, in their impotent rage,
flew at Captain Brown, who came off minus a considerable quantity of
skin from his face, of some hair from his head and whiskers, and of one
wing of his military full-dress coat; but he succeeded in securing his
man, and dragging him from his screaming women. The rajah, being now a
prisoner, was, a short time after this, sent under a strong escort
towards the frontiers of our provinces, under the special charge of
Captain Brown; but he escaped from him in the following extraordinary
manner. I believe he was not disgraced by having his person fettered, or
divested of its treasures; but he was permitted to be at large in his
tent. His seemingly placid and penitential manner lulled his captors
into the belief that he bitterly lamented his former treachery; but, had
their vigilance been ever so exemplary, his escape would have been
accomplished, for a conspiracy was formed--no doubt with a view to
gain--by some sepoys of his guard, and of those forming his escort, to
facilitate his escape under cover of the night. The conspirators so
managed, as to get on sentry at the same time, or relieve each other;
but the officer on the night-duty had positive orders to see the rajah,
and did see him, every relief, which I believed was hourly. He had, in
the course of the day, feigned ill, and wrapped himself up in his
bed-covering; and the officer was naturally satisfied on seeing him, as
he supposed, as usual, enveloped in his bed-clothes; but the cunning
rajah, instead of being penitent for his crimes, had, under the garb of
sickness, actually planned and made his escape: and several of our
native soldiers (the conspirators) had flown with him. Some time after
he was gone, they discovered that the object whom the officer of the
night supposed to be the sick rajah wrapped up in his bed-clothes, was
nothing more than a large pillow. When the last officer went his rounds,
he was satisfied, from appearances, that his charge was secure. This
hint ought to be a warning to young soldiers, not to trust to others
what they ought to do themselves. The neglect of the inferior officer
fell upon the commanding officer in charge, and he was brought to
general court martial, but acquitted, on the ground of the conspiracy of
his detachment. There could have been no necessity for such a trial, had
the visiting officer detected the escape at the prescribed time of his
visiting, and not been satisfied with the appearance instead of the
reality. What could be expected from such a character--from one who had
planned the destruction of those very people who so basely aided and
abetted his escape? Of the sepoys who thus broke their allegiance to the
government, all who were taken suffered the heavy penalty of their
crime--death. This should ever be the result of conspiracy. There can be
no question that the rajah had bribed them with some valuable jewels at
the time, or held out to these infatuated and mercenary traitors golden
promises of future aggrandizement. His escape was in the very heart of
his own country; but who would admit a traitor? He could not procure an
asylum, even in the midst of his own territory. He was hunted from fort
to fort, and literally from door to door, execrated and despised; and he
was, at last, found dead somewhere in Scindia's country--the just reward
of his unprovoked, treasonable, and treacherous conduct. He justly
forfeited his throne, and merited his fall.

We took up our quarters for the night in a small tope of trees, near the
Home Doongra, the eminence which I have before spoken of. The night
being sultry and hot, I slept on the outside of my tent. Close to my
feet ran a little rippling stream, the banks of which were thick and
bushy. I had not reclined long on my couch, before I heard a rustling
noise among the bushes, and the cries of so many animals, that I began
to think I was in rather a dangerous neighbourhood, and got my pistols
ready, in case a tiger or other beast of prey should have taken a fancy
to the body of the baggage-master, in preference to that of some more
comely person. I listened attentively for a considerable time, when I
heard imitations of the sounds of birds. I then knew I was in the
vicinity of thieves, and kept my pistol on the cock. At last, I
distinctly heard a low voice say, "He wakes--squat down." I instantly
jumped off my cot, and ran towards the place; but they were off, and,
from the darkness of the night, I could not see them, or they were so
close it was quite impossible they could have escaped. From the noise
they made in scampering off, there must have been some five or six of
them. I should have changed my quarters after this, but the moon at this
time stole from behind a cloud, and illumined all around, and I slept
peaceably till the morning dawned. We then commenced our reconnoitring,
during which we were frequently saluted with a sixty-four pounder, but
escaped unhurt.

The remainder of the division arrived this morning, and in the course of
the day we completely invested the town and fort. We took up our
position on the east side of the fort, having the river Nerbuddah, with
a large village and tope of trees, in our front, which completely
screened us from view. The information brought into camp by the spy
spoken of, with his plans and drawings of the fort, were found, on a
minute examination, to be utterly false. It turned out that he had never
been near the fort, but loitered about in the woods and villages in its
vicinity, and there gained the information from which he drew his plans.
The integrity and faith of this native had been such, that his master
would have trusted his life on his veracity. For the long period of more
than twenty years had this spy borne the toils and risks of his perilous
occupation, without once having been detected in a falsehood; but his
grey hairs were now, at a late period of his life, disgraced. For his
long services, however, he was pensioned off, and placed in a solitary
hut in his old age, to repent of this one act of deception. He confessed
that his old tottering frame had refused to bear him as heretofore, and
that fear had caused him to commit this his first transgression.

We had gained unquestionable information that a large body of our old
friends, the Pindarees, had found an asylum in this fort, to the number
of five hundred men, to assist in its defence. The place was so closely
invested by us, that a man could not possibly escape; and we, one and
all, were determined to chastise the garrison for their base treachery,
and the Pindarees for their impudence. Although this town and fort
occupied more than three miles in circumference, yet, at night, such was
our care of their precious inmates, we formed a complete and close chain
of sentinels around the whole of the space; and every quarter of a mile
we had posted strong mounted and dismounted piquets, whose horses were
constantly on the bit. The primary object of our brave general was to
avoid any unnecessary effusion of blood; and, consequently, mercy was
tendered to the occupants of the fort, provided they would give it up.
Every base stratagem was resorted to, as usual, to gain time to
reinforce and strengthen the fort, under the plea of taking time to
think of the proffered terms of reconciliation. All this while we could
see every hand employed in building new fortifications, under the
delusion that our guns were only intended to intimidate them into
compliance. They were confirmed in this opinion, not only by the
predictions of their priests, but from the supposed impossibility of
getting any guns of a large size over the gigantic mountains we had
traversed; and, indeed, to view the lofty mountains, to use the words of
the natives, "It was difficult for the sharp-eyed hawk to find his way
over such precipices, for they were as stupendous as the midnight moon,
or the morning light peeping from the newly-lighted chambers of the
East." This delusion lulled them into fancied security, and their
hardened hearts became steeled to the advice of reason, and our offers
of compassion in favour of their mothers, wives, and babes. We soon
convinced them that our guns were not so much to be despised as they
imagined; but, before we opened our batteries on them, one effort more
was made by us to prevent the destruction of life, by another offer of
mercy, accompanied by the most earnest entreaties that, if their own
hearts still continued hardened and obdurate, and they were resolved to
resist the dictates of reason, they would, at least, not imbrue their
hands in the blood of their families. These messages of mercy were
treated with contempt, and spurned with indignation. Every effort that
the feeling mind could suggest, or humanity dictate, was resorted to, to
induce these deluded people to listen to our proposals; and every kind
of forbearance was shown to them, up to the last moment. On the
following morning our guns opened, which drove their priests early to
the temple, to solicit protection and aid from the dumb objects of their
idolatrous worship. The warrior was now seen putting on his coat of
mail; all was bustle, consternation, and confusion. When our cannonading
commenced, the birds, scared, soon got on the rapid wing, and sought
shelter in the distant woods, and the deer fled with the quickness of
lightning across the plain, bending their way towards the dreary forest.
The enemy returned our fire, and hoisted their colours as a proof of
earnest and total defiance of our power. We had not as yet completed our
shelling-batteries, and therefore, before these magazines of death were
finished, we once more called upon the inmates of the fort to send their
families out, with an assurance that we would guarantee their protection
and safety; that they should have a safeguard to whatever part of the
country they wished to proceed; and that they should not be deprived of
any of their private property. We could not make up our minds to fight
against women and children. Our humane general begged most earnestly,
that this, his last entreaty, might be attended to, as he should, on
their refusal, commence his shelling, which would bereave them of many
of those dear objects whom he now, for the last time, gave them an
opportunity to save. A certain time was given for an answer. They knew
that the guarantee proffered for the safety of their families was
inviolable. On this point they were fully satisfied, and our continued
solicitations at length melted their hearts. They consented; and the
following morning, at ten o'clock, was fixed for their coming out. At
this prospect we all felt much delighted, for it deadens the heart of a
brave man to hear the cries and wailings of inoffensive women and
innocent children. Every bosom panted at the happy event, as some great
calamity removed from our own hearts.

In the morning, the sun rose in all his majesty, and his bright beams
seemed to shine with approbation on our act of mercy. We had selected a
large mango tope as the place of rendezvous. The appointed hour arrived,
and we were delighted to see an immense number of people issuing from
the fort, and bending their slow and gloomy steps towards the tope. It
seemed like some funeral procession following some dear relative to the
tomb. Some wept aloud and some in silence; some pressed their little
offspring to their anguished bosoms; and others cast a lingering eye on
the distant tower, where stood the objects of their love. Yet there
seemed a confidence of safety beaming from every eye. A few men
accompanied them, but without arms; and the bastion and walls were lined
with soldiers, to witness the scene. There came grey-headed mothers,
young wives, and numbers of children, from ten and twelve years old, to
the fondling at the mother's breast. What a group of mortal creatures
rescued from the tomb of destruction! The total number was about one
thousand. Some of the women were truly beautiful, and very elegantly
attired. Having made known their places of abode, they were dispatched
under a safeguard. The procession moved slowly on. At about four hundred
yards from the fort, the eyes of most of the party were turned towards
the objects of their love, whom they were about to leave in danger; and
many did bid farewell, and for the last time--for many of their husbands
fell victims to their infatuated and blindfold zeal. When they had
proceeded about a mile from the fort, we gave the enemy three cheers,
testifying that we had strictly fulfilled the duties of the trust
confided to us. The garrison returned our cheers; and, having now
performed the duties of humanity, our next duty was due to our country.
In mercy to their families we did not commence shelling till the doleful
sounds could not reach their ears. We opened them about noon, and our
first shell fell about midway, which created a shout on the part of the
enemy; but the next started them from their hiding-places, and they
could be seen running in all directions.

Having thrown about a dozen, the rajah mounted the shawbroodge (king's
bastion) attended in state, to see the fun. We could recognise him by
his glittering chattah (state umbrella). In the bastion I suppose there
could not be less than twenty or thirty persons, nor could the distance
be less than a mile and a half. The captain of the artillery, determined
to regain his credit for his first bad shot, laid on a special one for
the bastion, and, wonderful to say, it lodged on its very top. In an
instant, even before the smoke cleared, the state chattah and every soul
disappeared, and the shouting in our batteries was terrific. Not a word
was returned from the fort; all seemed gloom and despair; and
self-preservation seemed to be thought of most by them, from the general
movement of the garrison. When the effect of the shell was seen, an
Irish sergeant of the artillery bellowed out, "By my conscience,
captain, but that was after picking some of their teeth for them, for I
saw one of the spalpeens scratching his head," The captain replied, "You
must have capital eyes, sergeant, to see a man scratch his head at this
distance."

"By the powers, your honour, I did see it, because I happened to be
looking at the very time, or I should not perhaps have seen him."

"Well, sergeant, I have no reason to doubt your word; will you try a
shell?"

"I should have no objection, but I have no chance of driving them away,
because they are all gone; but I should like to try one, and see if I
could hit something."

He fired, and immediately cried out, "By St. Patrick, but that's amongst
them, if they should happen to be there." This blunder caused a general
laugh at poor Paddy's expense, who seemed a little nettled, and
peevishly replied, "Fait! you may laugh, but that's more than those will
who were kilt by that shell just now."

We could distinctly hear the moanings of the wounded; and sad must have
been the fate of those poor fellows whose gaping wounds were left
bleeding, the shattered bones protruding through the lacerated flesh.
The very idea makes the sympathetic mind shudder; but the hearts of
these unfortunate creatures were as impenetrable as the stubborn rock on
which their fort was erected. Yet, this very fact serves but to increase
our sorrow for their benighted souls, influenced and guided by some
hypocritical priest or mendicant impostor, who leads them blindfold to
destruction.

The firing from the fort was good and steady, and some of their long
shots would have been no disgrace to a European gunner. I was, during
this siege, as before, baggage-master and acting aid-de-camp to
Brigadier-General Watson, C.B., who invested this fort in person, and
saw hourly the operations carried on under his own eye, being constantly
riding round the chain of posts, or in the breaching and other
batteries, always seeing things done, and strictly watching the progress
of the siege.

Our principal breaching-battery was on the east side of the fort,
keeping the pure stream of the sweet Nerbuddah running between ourselves
and the foe. Many of the enemy, when sipping of its crystal water, were
killed in the attempt to moisten their parched lips. I have more than
once nearly quarrelled with my brother officers on the following
subject, nor can I ever reconcile to my bosom, that the act is fair or
right. The question to which I alluded is this, whether it is fair that
I should secrete myself in a hole, or behind a wall, with a rifle, and
thus, unseen, shoot every poor creature who shows his nose, without my
own person being in the slightest danger. It is true, it is an enemy
whom you thus treat, but I do consider the act of placing one's self in
security, and from the hiding-place dealing out death, treads close upon
the heels of cowardice, if it does not come under the designation of
actual murder. Give me man to man, and sword to sword. I hate unfairness
in anything; and I do not think this practice, though often adopted,
will stand the test of scrutiny in the eye of justice.

We breached a corner bastion of the town, the base of which ran down
into the river, on the banks of which we could approach the breach out
of sight, and pounce upon it unobserved, and out of the reach of their
cannon and small arms. All was impatience to get to work. The breach
seemed fit for storming. Various were the opinions of the impetuous
soldiers relative to its practicability. Some said they could ride up
it, others that they could drive a gig up. Thus went round the
thoughtless opinions of rash youth, ever willing to run headstrong into
danger; but our prudent engineer, Captain Tickell, smiled on their hasty
opinions, and sarcastically replied, "Whenever you do storm, rest
assured you will not find the ascent of that breach a light job. To
satisfy myself," he continued, "I will go. It is better to sacrifice one
life than a hundred." Saying this, he immediately crossed the river,
about a quarter of a mile lower down, and stole along the banks of the
Nerbuddah unobserved, having given previous instructions to the whole of
the batteries to keep their fire for the top of the breach, should he be
attacked. He seemed to ascend with difficulty. Every heart trembled for
his safety, for he was a brave officer, and one of our best engineers.
He at last mounted the summit of the breach, and waved his hat. At that
moment several of the enemy rushed out, but he jumped down the breach.
They came to the very verge of it; but no sooner were their bodies seen,
and the engineer safe from its top, than the whole of our guns, with
shot and shells, were opened, and those who rushed out for his
destruction met their own. Not one of them returned to tell the tale.

On the return of the engineer to the battery, he said nothing to any
one, having been before much annoyed by the speculative opinions of
those who stood about him. He, however, after his return, altered the
direction of the firing of the breaching-battery to a large tree which
had been shot down, and which must necessarily impede our ascent. This,
he afterwards said, completely blocked up the footing of the breach;
and, had we stormed according to the opinions and ardent wishes of many
of the inexperienced, we must have suffered considerably in the loss of
lives. He afterwards said, that he thought it a providential thing that
such opinions, however foolish, had been expressed, for it was the cause
of his being able to remedy an evil he could not for a moment have
foreseen. On the contrary, it had before been his opinion, that the
fallen tree would have facilitated our progress rather than impeded it.
He thought we should be able to storm in the afternoon. A howitzer was
immediately laid for the removal of this obstacle, and the shell fired
from it lodged in the very centre of the rooty part of the tree, and
when it burst blew it to pieces. This drew upon the artillery-officer
who laid it the eulogiums of the spectators. Amongst the number was the
Irish sergeant, who cried out, "By the powers, captain, but that's what
I call a moving shot."

"Yes," replied the captain, "a remover, certainly, for I see the stump
of the tree is gone. I wish you would remove the other large bough that
hangs on the side of the bastion."

"I will try, if your honour pleases; but I should rather see your honour
do it, to finish the work you are just after completing, and I will try
and do the rest."

Thus went round the merry joke, and we were all laughing heartily at
poor Pat's bulls and drollery, when a whisper was heard running the
lines, "Fall in, storming-party!" On went the pointed bayonet; in went
the new flint. Everybody was busy in an instant, and naught was heard
save the hammering of flints and the fixing of bayonets. This was about
three o'clock in the afternoon. We crossed the Nerbuddah, and marched
along the bed of the river to our other breaching-battery, and there
rendezvoused for a time, till all was ready.

The gallant general on whose staff I had acted had volunteered to lead
the storming-party in person, as it was supposed we had a sharp job
before us. I, as part of his staff, did not of course remain behind, but
had the honour to participate with the general in the toils and glory of
the day. Our situations, I assure the reader, were no sinecures; for we
fought and fagged hard for nearly three hours.

About four o'clock the party moved on, led by the brave general and his
suite. The storming-party consisted of two companies of the Bengal 14th
regiment Native Infantry, supported by the 13th regiment. We stole
slowly on along the bank, every tongue as still as the midnight thief.
About ten or twenty paces before we got to the breach, the column was
visible to a projecting bastion of the fort, from which a strong party
of Arabs was dispatched, to stay our progress and oppose our entrance.
These for a considerable time disputed our entry, but our brave native
troops, inspired by the cheering of their gallant leader, soon beat them
from their posts. They then took possession of some huts that had
escaped being burnt, and fired through loop-holes; but they soon burnt
themselves out, by setting fire, either by intention or accident, to
these huts. This for a moment stopped our further progress, as we could
not pass the flaming huts. Here we lost some few men; and, seeing that
the destruction of numbers of our brave sepoys was inevitable, if we
remained long in this position, we rushed through the flames, and on the
opposite side found a large body of men drawn up to oppose us. For a
short time the struggle was hard; but our brave little general soon gave
the word, "Charge!" It was then that the butchery commenced. For a time
our brave opponents would not give way, but rushed upon the bayonet's
point, and fought sword in hand; but, when they did begin to run, the
carnage was truly dreadful. I saw one grey-headed old Arab,
notwithstanding that he had two bayonets through his body, and was lying
on his back, cutting away in a most resolute and heroic manner. The
third wound which he received was a shot through his head, which settled
him. We followed close on the heels of the fugitives, who fell in all
directions. They branched off towards the left, in the hope of getting
off in that quarter, but we had previously sent a strong party of
infantry and cavalry to prevent their escape. They were now completely
hemmed in, and fight they must, or die. They did fight, and I never saw
men fall so fast. They were in such numbers that every shot told.
Hundreds of them threw down their arms and took to the water. These were
for the most part drowned, and those who reached the opposite shore were
made prisoners; but these were comparatively few to the number who met a
watery grave. Some few escaped into the fort; and others threw down
their arms, and begged for mercy.

In a deep ravine were about a hundred women and children. These poor
creatures had been detained as corn-grinders, and our shells,
unfortunately, had made sad destruction amongst them. Many of their
children had their legs and arms shot off, and I saw one with its
entrails protruding, a ball having gone completely through its body. We
left a guard over this wretched party, to prevent them from being fired
on. At this point we were exposed to a smart fire from the fort, which
took off our attention from these women, and we pushed on, and in an
hour had completely cleared the town of its fighting men. The fire from
the fort became warmer; and it was therefore requisite that we should
maintain what we had got, for night now began to cast a gloom on the
scene below. It was now necessary to establish ourselves for the night,
under cover from the shots of the fort; which we did by occupying
temples and other buildings, as also the principal entrances to the
main streets. In a couple of hours we were secure and safe, and not a
single shot was fired. All was calm and quiet, save the distressing
moanings of the wounded and the dying, whose cries and groans were truly
touching to the heart. We grieved that we could not relieve them; but
all that we could do was to take care that none of our troops or
followers ventured to add to, or aggravate their pains, by rifling their
persons, or by any taunting triumph. It would have been a mercy to have
hidden from the human eye such a sight as was then before us, and we
hailed with joy the closing of day, which shut from our view the
distorted features of dying men, and the gushing streams of the wounded.
The night set in, in dreary darkness, and the clouds seemed thick and
gloomy; and in an instant all was hidden from short-sighted man, and
seen alone to Him to whose care and protection we will leave the
sufferers.

[Illustration]

[Illustration]




CHAPTER XXI.


After we had taken full possession of the town of Gurrah Mundellah, I
was directed, at about ten o'clock at night, to proceed alone and
examine a distant temple, to ascertain if it was a safe asylum to lodge
men in for the night. This temple stood at the end of a long street, to
which I was obliged to grope my way, guided only by the distant fired
hut, or a peeping star. Why did the general send me alone? Because he
knew I would go, and it was better to risk the life of one man than five
hundred. I cannot say that I had any great _penchant_ for this job; but
off I marched without a murmur. It was the general's part to order, and
my duty promptly and cheerfully to obey. The night being dark, and the
dead and the dying lying in all directions, it was no very enviable
trip; but duty led me through every difficulty. My pace was slow and
cautious; not quite so slow as the goose-step, but something near it. In
each hand I had a pistol, and I kept one eye turned to the right and the
other to the left, now and then stealing a glimpse to the front, but
could not spare time to look behind me. Occasionally my pointed toe
would come in contact with a dead body or wounded man. This created
sensations by no means agreeable. I had not proceeded far, when some
person seized my leg, and said, "Who are you?" This a little startled
me; I suddenly drew it away, and said I was his friend. "Then give me
some water," said he, "for I am wounded." I felt every inclination to
render the poor creature this service, but it was quite impossible; so I
passed on, but had hardly recovered my fright, when a large beam that
was on fire fell with a tremendous crash, and several voices were heard,
and the sound of persons running from the place where the beam fell. I
stopped for a moment to listen, but all was again quiet, and I moved on
slowly till I reached the foot or steps of the temple, when I heard the
tinkling of a small bell. I ascended the steps and reached the door,
when I heard some person murmuring out his midnight prayers. I at last
peeped in, and discerned an aged priest prostrating himself on the
ground before one of his gods. A small lamp was suspended from the
ceiling. I entered and gave him the customary salute of the evening, but
he had not the politeness to return my salute, but blew out the light
and ran out precipitately, and I followed him, having first minutely
surveyed the temple. What the priest took me for I know not, but
probably for a ghost, for he was out of the temple in a moment. I
returned by the same streets I came down, but a little faster. When
about half-way, I heard voices; then horses' feet; and, at last, I could
see several men on horseback approaching, and soon found, by their
conversation, that they were some men from our camp, belonging to our
ally, Scindia, who had got in for the purpose of plundering. I slunk
behind a hut till they had passed, as I knew well that these marauders
would have cut my throat for the sake of the buttons on my coat; so I
permitted them to pass on, and I had hardly emerged from my
hiding-place, when a huge Pariah dog set up a tremendous howling. He was
sitting down close by a dead man, no doubt his master, for on the
following morning he was still there, and howled piteously when any one
approached the body. The poor animal was shot, and thus put out of his
misery.

I at last reached the general, and made my report; after which I had the
honour of escorting two companies to the temple; but the old priest had
not returned. I then had to return alone; and, having established the
troops, the general and suite, myself among the number, returned to
camp, and, after a good dinner, retired to bed and slept soundly.

We recommenced our work on the following morning. On our arrival in the
town, we were informed that a Captain B. and about fifty men had been in
the fort the greater part of the night. On receiving this information,
the general could hardly credit the assertion; but, on approaching the
fort, he found it was true. The gate of the fort was thrown open, and we
entered; and, never did human eye look on more accumulated woe and
misery than the scene before us presented. The carnage far exceeded that
of Hattrass, or of any of the other storms I have had the unpleasant
task to narrate. I shall not attempt to describe the scene; and, should
these Memoirs ever meet the eye of any of my fair countrywomen, I am
confident they will thank me for the omission. Suffice that upwards of
five hundred bodies were, in the course of the day, committed to a large
well, into which the enemy had thrown many of the dead during the siege.
This well was closed up; and a man of the artillery sculptured on a
stone, with his bayonet,

    THE SOLDIER'S GRAVE.

There let them rest in peace!

We had scarcely proceeded one hundred yards when we met Captain B. and
his men, with the keeledar and another person in custody. The general
thus addressed him, "Captain B., by what authority have you acted as you
have done, and thus, without orders or instruction, permitted your men
to enter the fort?" The captain told a lame story, to the effect that
the keeledar had offered him a bribe to permit him to escape through the
limits of his post; and that, having refused this, he received
information that, if he wished, he might march his men into the fort.
There was evidently a mystery in all this, and the ill-natured world
said many unkind things on the subject; but how far these may have been
true I cannot pretend to say. Certain it is, however, that there was
something that came out a short time afterwards, that would have brought
the affair under the investigation of a general court-martial; but the
individual died, and the affair died with him, and he was buried on the
spot. He was an officer of unblemished character; and little did he
think that the spot where he was accused of committing his first offence
would be his grave. The keeledar was a most respectable-looking man, and
elegantly dressed; but I do not think I ever saw a more careworn and
dejected face than his in my life-time. He seemed weighed down with woe.
He salaamed to the general in a most respectful and humble manner, and
said, "Do what you please with me," at the same time offering his head.
I was desired to inform him that he must answer for his rebellion before
a court-martial, and that his life would be the forfeit if he could not
state satisfactory reasons for his treachery and rebellion, and satisfy
the government that this act of disaffection was not his own. He
replied, "I am as willing to meet death as I am to meet you here." He
was placed in security, and our next object was to dispose of the
prisoners. These were in number about two thousand, and more than
one-third of them were wounded. They were allowed their option, either
to return to their homes, or remain in the town. The greater part of
them availed themselves of the former offer; and, having been deprived
of their arms, they went off to join their families, and bear the sad
tidings to many an anxious wife of her husband's death, and to many a
fond mother the bitter news of her son having been shot.

Having arranged everything for the protection of the property, I was
appointed a prize agent for head-quarters, and we immediately commenced
collecting the property to one spot. My first care was to put double
sentinels on the entrance to the zenanah, till I could, with the other
two prize-agents, search that place; but, as they were busy in another
place, I took a peep at my double sentinels, and found one of them had
left his post, and gone inside. I met him coming towards me with two
large boxes, about two feet by three. I asked him what he had got there,
and he said that they contained nothing but paun. I told him to give
them to me. He did so, and I found them of an enormous weight. They
contained, in fact, the whole of the jewellery of the zenanah. In the
verandah were large bales of shawls and silks, sewn together like
quilts, and in an inner room was the family of the keeledar, consisting
of his wife and two daughters, who, on beholding me, threw themselves at
my feet, and begged for mercy in the most beseeching manner.

I could as soon have laid the finger of harm on the author of my being;
indeed, the duties of my present situation were repugnant and
uncongenial to my feelings; but, whatever situation I was appointed to,
or intrusted with, I always made it my primary object to fulfil the
several branches of it in the most rigid manner, consistent with the
rules of the service and usages of war; and, therefore, the more
sympathetic feelings were absorbed in those of duty. I, however,
consoled these poor weeping creatures with the full assurance of their
safety and protection against harm or pollution, of which they expressed
the most dreadful fears. This privileged right of war, so esteemed by
the native powers, has in no instance ever stained the victorious
banners of the East India Company; but these females had wrought their
anguished minds on this subject to a pitch of frenzy and distraction,
and all I could do and say could not drive from their fear-distorted
features the evident dread under which they laboured. When, at length, I
called God to witness the sincerity of my assurances, I could see a ray
of hope beam and shine through their tears of apprehension, and their
tempestuous bosoms became comparatively quieted and calmed. The thanks
and prayers of the elder daughter would have affected with pity and
commiseration the most tyrannic heart. She was, I think, the most
perfect beauty I had ever seen. Her form was sylph-like and elegant; her
features regular and beautifully shaped; and her eyes were of a jet
black, and peeped from under her dark eyebrows like stars stealing from
behind the murky clouds of night. Her voice, when she spoke, was
extremely sweet, and the words of consolation which she addressed to her
aged mother, would have drawn tears of pity from the most obdurate
heart. When she threw herself at my feet, and supplicated for mercy, her
piercing and anguished looks stole drops of pity from my eyes; and the
conjuring expression of her beautiful countenance would have won the
most savage bosom to commiseration. She seized my sabre, which was
suspended from my side, and grasped it with both her hands, till I
solemnly pledged myself for her protection and safety. When I did this,
her beautiful eyes beamed forth that gratitude which she could not find
words to express. I assisted her to rise, and then placed the three
ladies in a room upstairs, till they could, with propriety, be made over
to the keeledar, who was at present in custody, and must meet the
sentence of a general court-martial. It was supposed that nothing could
save him from the heavy penalty of his rebellion.

We were the whole day getting together the prize property--elephants,
camels, horses, bullocks, &c. During the day, the general visited the
keeledar's afflicted family. He assured them of their protection and
safety, and ordered that every requisite for their use should be given
them, more especially their clothes, which were splendid indeed! They
were protected, consoled, and sympathized with. It is the boast and
pride of the brave to administer succour to the afflicted, and wipe away
the tear of sorrow. Our brave general was humane as he was brave; and
when he visited this weeping family, he said, "Shipp, this is a sad
sight; what can possibly be done to relieve their distress?" He desired
me to inform them of his inclination to alleviate their sufferings;
that they should, in the course of the day, see their father; and that,
should they wish it, they might be permitted to see him every day, but
that, for the present, he must live separate from them. The general
desired me to say everything that could console them. The elder daughter
threw herself at his feet, and thanked him for his kindness. I saw the
tear stealing down the gallant general's cheek as he turned his head
from her; and for a time he was so overpowered by his feelings that he
could not speak.

In the course of the day the ladies were permitted to visit the
keeledar. They proceeded, veiled, to the room in which he was confined;
and the meeting was truly distressing. The daughter whispered words of
comfort into her father's ear, and did her utmost to console and support
him; begging him not to be so dejected, and assuring him that they had
fallen into the hands of merciful and humane persons, whose general had
himself assured her of her safety and protection from all harm. She
continued, "Come, dear father, cheer up;" and she kissed away his tears,
and wiped his eyes with the end of her white muslin dress. The old man
cried and sobbed most piteously; but, having given full vent to his
tears, he was more cheerful. They remained with him about a couple of
hours, and then returned to their apartments in the zenanah, greatly
composed and comforted.

The prize property was removed to camp, and sold by public auction,
which lasted a whole day. It realized a very large sum of money. The
general court-martial for the trial of the rebel keeledar now assembled,
composed entirely of native commissioned officers, the senior officer
acting as president. A warrant had been granted by the governor-general
in council of Fort William, for the convening of native general
courts-martial, for the trial of all such persons as might rebel against
the government. This man now stood arraigned before a tribunal thus
constituted, charged with treachery and rebellion against the
government. Forty years' service crowned the brow of the venerable
soubahdar who presided on this occasion, and he was a very shrewd clever
fellow. The proceedings were conducted by a European officer, through an
interpreter, and committed to paper in English. The crime with which the
prisoner stood charged was read to him by the interpreter. He seemed
perfectly to comprehend the charge against him, and he pleaded "Guilty."
This he pronounced in a manly and firm voice, stating, that he fought
entirely irresponsibly, and that he was ready and willing to meet the
penalty of the law, and atone for his disobedience with his life. Here
he struck his bosom, and seemed to wait the order for his execution. The
president turned round to him, and said, in a most pathetic manner,
"Keeledar, you have now put your seal to your own death by that
confession; but have you not got a wife and children? If you have no
value for your own life, will you also murder them?" This appeal, urged
in the most impressive manner, roused the keeledar from his lethargy. He
started, looked wild, paused; his lips seemed to quiver; and his head
dropped on his heaving bosom. There seemed to be an innate working of
the soul--a dreadful struggle between two contending feelings. The good
and humane president soothingly said, "Take your time, ere you pronounce
the sad doom of your wife and children--your time is ours." The whole
court, and the numerous spectators, now waited with breathless
impatience and anxiety, to hear the keeledar's reply. At last he said,
"Your observation relative to my wife and children is just. I will not
be the means of agonizing their feelings; but," continued he, "what will
the rajah say, should I deceive him?" The rajah's treachery and
rebellion were explained to him, and he was apprised of his elopement,
and the probability there was that he was dead. Upon hearing this, his
feelings seemed to undergo another struggle, and, after a short pause,
he drew from his bosom a long roll of paper, which contained the most
peremptory instructions from the rajah, to fight the English, "as long
as one stone of Gurrah Mundellah stood upon another, and as long as one
drop of water remained in the Nerbuddah, to wash away their blood." This
letter was received the very day he had promised to give up the fort to
Major O'Brien. Other documents fully proved that his resistance to the
government was in fulfilment of the positive orders of his master. He
was consequently fully acquitted, but kept in custody for some time. He
was afterwards pensioned by the Company. Had this man been hanged, it
would have cast a gloom over our victory. He afterwards confessed to me,
that the difficulty he had experienced in resolving upon the course
which he at last was induced to pursue on his trial, arose from his
doubts whether it was more honourable to sacrifice his own life, or
eternally to offend his tyrannic master. He expressed himself as being
very grateful to the court for their great care and anxiety about him,
more especially to the good soubahdar. I immediately communicated the
fact of his acquittal to his agonized family, who prostrated themselves
on the earth, and said, "Bless the humane English! may they long live
and prosper in this land!" Immediately after his acquittal he was
permitted to live with his wife and daughters, and he was received by
them with feelings that would have done credit and honour to a more
enlightened family. From that moment his beautiful daughter was no more
visible; but they all proceeded with us towards the small fort of
Huttra, until the turbulence of the country in which the keeledar
resided had in some measure subsided, when he was permitted to return to
his home.

Having left a regiment for the protection of the fort of Huttra, we
proceeded towards Saugar. On our way we had to call on several smaller
forts, the occupants of which gave them up without a murmur; and in a
short time we reached our cantonments: but scarcely had we had time to
cool ourselves, when we were again put in requisition, and directed to
proceed against the strong stone fort of Gurrah Khootah. Towards this
fort we moved some time in the month of March, 1819; and we were not
displeased with the news, as we were indebted to the keeledar of that
fort an old grudge, for his impudence when we passed it some few months
before. The garrison was overbearing, and it was high time to bring them
to their senses. This fort belonged to Scindia, one of our allies, but
had been sold by the garrison, for their ten months' arrears of pay, to
a neighbouring rajah, who could not or would not give it up without a
fight for it. The circumstances of the purchase are these:--

Some years before that period, the fort of Gurrah Khootah was besieged
by a considerable force from the Deccan, and they persisted in the siege
for some eighteen months, but could not take it. The rajah, then its
owner, not being able to drive the invading force away, solicited Jean
Baptiste, a bastard Frenchman in Scindia's service, to disperse the
besiegers, with a promise that he would reward him for so doing with
some land in the vicinity of the fort. This was accepted by the
Frenchman, who, with a considerable force, succeeded in driving the
besiegers to their own country. This accomplished, he took up his ground
on the place the besiegers had left; and, a day having been appointed
for the arrangement of the promised reward, the hypocritical Jean
Baptiste marched into the fort in the greatest splendour and
magnificence, with colours flying, drums beating, war-trumpets
screeching, &c. His forces were permitted to enter indiscriminately, and
no treachery was even dreamed of. When the usual greetings and
congratulations were over, shoulder to shoulder, and breast to breast,
at a preconcerted signal, the unsuspecting and unarmed garrison were
pounced upon, and driven out of the fort, and deprived of their wives
and daughters. Jean Baptiste then gave, or sold, the said fort to
Scindia, who placed in charge of it one Harratoone, an Armenian.

The garrison, under this man's command, sold the fort for their arrears
of pay, and the purchaser was the grandson of him whom Jean Baptiste had
so treacherously deceived; and, if every one had his right, it was
legally his own without paying for it.

This grandson of the original owner of the fort paid up the arrears of
the garrison--eighty thousand rupees--the old garrison walked out, and
he walked in. Scindia, however, still considered this fort to be his;
but, as he could not take it, he called upon us, his allies, to take it
for him. Had it been the old garrison, we should have been better
pleased; but it was our duty to obey orders; so to work we went, the
garrison having positively refused to give it up without a struggle.

This fort stands on the river Scend; and two sides of it are protected
and guarded by that river, which is deep. The other two faces are
protected by a strong stone wall thrown round the fort, on the banks of
a branch of the same river. It was, therefore, necessary that we should
make ourselves masters of this outwork, before we commenced breaching
the fort. For this purpose a corner bastion was selected, where the
water of the river was not more than three feet deep. In a few hours the
breach was ready, and the moon's rising was the time appointed for the
storming of this bastion. The ascent was high and difficult. The general
was in the battery when the storming party moved out, and I was rather
surprised to see him proceed with them down to the river. I, of course,
stuck close to his elbow. The enemy soon observed us, and commenced a
heavy fire, but too high. Our brave sepoys mounted the breach like
heroes; but at the top the fight seemed desperate on both sides, and at
one time we thought our men were giving way. Impressed with this notion,
our brave little general dashed through the water, and was on the top of
the bastion in a moment, and soon cheered his men in. The enemy fled
towards the fort, and left us in quiet possession of the outer
fortification. There was a large house, about two hundred paces from
this corner, which our men occupied during the night, and we returned to
the camp pleased with our day's exploit, and that we had not stained Old
England's banner.

On the following morning the engineer fixed on a place for the batteries
on the opposite side of the river, and breached an enormous bastion,
which, like that of the fort of Mundellah, ran down to the water's edge.
In four-and-twenty hours the heavy guns were moved down and put into
their places for work, establishing our grand magazine in a village
immediately behind them, to which a road had been dug for the purpose of
conveying the ammunition, without being exposed to the firing from the
fort. The general gave most positive orders, before he left the battery,
that no ammunition should, on any account, be lodged in the magazine,
but that it should be kept behind the village. These orders having been
given, we rode home to breakfast. I had scarcely swallowed a mouthful
when the general seemed restless, and presently said, "Shipp, saddle
your horse immediately, and ride at speed to the grand battery. I have a
strange presentiment that all is not right there." My horse was saddled
in a moment, and I galloped down with all possible speed. When I arrived
at the battery I really thought I should have fallen off my horse, for
the first things that met my eye were the whole of the tumbrells, with
shots and shells, and some thousands of rounds of gunpowder. These were
all drawn up in the battery, and a single shot from the fort would have
blown them all up. I ordered them to be removed instantly behind the
village; and this we completed without the enemy's firing one shot. I
found, on inquiry, that the captain to whom the general's command was
given, delivered his orders to his subaltern--the subaltern to the
sergeant--the sergeant to the corporal--and so on to the poor stupid
driver of the bullocks. I hope this circumstance may meet the eye of
the young soldier, and teach him the absolute necessity of the strictest
obedience to orders, and impress upon his mind that, whatever may be his
rank, it does not place him above seeing things executed himself. Had
those tumbrells, through the neglect which occurred, been blown up, many
lives must have been destroyed, and the loss of the contents of the
tumbrells would have obliged us to have raised the siege, and given the
enemy time to fortify their fort. All this mischief would have fallen on
him whose imperative duty it was to have seen the general's orders
obeyed, and not to have intrusted their execution to others. Crimes out
of number would have been framed against him: such as utter contempt of
orders--pointed neglect of duty--wantonly destroying the lives of his
soldiers, and the property of the government with which he had been
intrusted. Nothing could have saved his commission; and, if the accident
had happened, what could have soothed his feelings? As it was, the
escape was quite providential; for, scarcely had the last tumbrell got
round the corner of the village, before the enemy commenced a heavy
cannonade on the very spot from which the ammunition tumbrells had been
removed. On my return towards camp I met the general riding towards the
fort at speed, still imagining that something was not right. When I
reported to him the circumstances just described, he rode on and
admonished the captain in most severe terms; but his heart was as humane
as it was brave, and he soon pardoned the neglect, and forgot all about
it.

We then went round the other works, to see that everything was safe and
in obedience to his orders. In the mortar-battery, the general observed
to the captain of the artillery, that he thought the magazine was too
close to the battery; but the officer explained the nature of its
construction, which satisfied him of its security, and we rode home
again.

We were in hopes of opening our breaching-guns on the following morning,
for which purpose we all rode down to see them commence. The
shelling-battery had commenced the day before, and did wonderful
execution. The guns were loaded; the match was lit; when, on a sudden,
our attention was drawn from the contemplation of this view to one of a
less pleasant nature--an awful explosion in our mortar-battery, the
shells from which were ascending some yards above the heads of the
artillery-men, and then exploding. I was immediately dispatched to
ascertain the cause of this unfortunate occurrence. I rode within a
hundred and eighty yards of the fort, but I was not conscious that I was
so near, till their balls roused me from my reverie. Something still
kept blowing up in our mortar-battery, so that I had not time to go
further round. I continued my course, therefore, as hard as my horse
would go, till I arrived at the river. The crossing, at this part of the
river, was completely commanded by three guns, which the good-natured
souls in the fort had laid for me when I should get in the middle of the
said crossing. The water was about four feet deep; consequently, my
progress was slow. The first shot went about twenty yards over me; the
next fell short; but the third struck the water so close to me, that the
spray covered both myself and my horse, and I was wet through. In this
state I dismounted, keeping my horse between me and the fort, for I had
still the worst part to go over. The moment they saw me dismount, there
was a general shout from the bastion, conceiving that the last shot had
killed me. This shouting and taunting roused the indignation of the
aid-de-camp, and, to check their mirth, he mounted again, and took off
his hat and waved it in defiance of them. Upon this they sent three
messengers at once, but not one came to me. Before I reached the battery
the enemy were, naturally enough, very busy in availing themselves of
the general panic caused by our mortar magazine having blown up. Near
the battery, the first object that met my sight was a native gunner
literally skinned from head to foot, crying most piteously for a drink
of water. Nearer the battery lay several European and native soldiers
dead. Everything was in the greatest confusion, and consternation was on
every countenance. The dreadful catastrophe happened in the following
manner:--

Behind the mortars lay some hundreds of shells, ready loaded, to be used
as they might be required; a shell, fired from one of the centre
mortars, burst in the muzzle; the fusee recoiled and fell on the loaded
shells; these exploded, and communicated with the magazine, which, at
that moment, a person had entered for the purpose of bringing out some
requisite. The explosion blew up this poor man, the unfortunate native
gunner before spoken of. It was more than twenty paces between the
magazine and the spot where this poor creature was found. In two days
after, he died. The melancholy event could not have been foreseen or
prevented; but the consequences were serious--sixteen men suffered, four
of them Europeans. Three of the victims were lying in the battery,
without their bodies having been even touched with gunpowder. They died
from concussion of the brain. One European was blown some yards into the
river, without the slightest injury. Conductor Glassop, of the Bengal
Foot Artillery, a man of upwards of twenty stone, was standing amidst
the shells when they blew up, and, strange to say, escaped uninjured.
Circumstances like these are the inscrutable doings of Providence, and
far beyond man's poor and narrow comprehension. At this time the general
had himself arrived, and having ascertained the cause of the sad
catastrophe, could only add his moiety of commiseration for the poor
sufferers. Blame could not be attached to anyone. The affair was one of
the unavoidable accidents of war, which no human foresight could have
guarded against or prevented.

The enemy, availing themselves of the calamity, rushed to that side of
the fort in great numbers, and brought every moveable gun and matchlock
to bear on the scene of woe. Having removed the dead and wounded to
camp, we reloaded the whole of the mortars and howitzers in the two
batteries, and levelled them at the multitude of people that had
collected on the fort. They were fired in quick succession, when a
general flight took place, and many of them ran their last race. Nearly
sixty shells, with some few shots, were fired in a few minutes, and not
a soul could for some time afterwards be seen at the same side of the
fort, save some few bearing away the dead and the wounded. We then gave
them three cheers, but they returned not the greeting.

At this moment our breaching-battery opened with a salvo, accompanied
with three hearty cheers, which that side of the garrison returned.
After this we went on coolly and systematically, and we returned home
again, visiting the several posts and batteries. In the evening, the
European soldiers were committed to the grave, followed by their
comrades, who dropped a tear to their memory.

The following morning I went to breakfast with Captain Daggalier, of the
old 13th regiment Bengal Native Infantry, in the large house occupied by
our men, about five hundred yards from the fort. We were busily engaged
upstairs securing a hearty meal, when a large three-pound shot found its
way through the window of the room in which we sat, and passed under the
table between my legs and those of Captain Daggalier. This convinced me
that there is some advantage in having long legs. Mine were so
excessively lanky, that I could only just screw them under the edge of
the little camp-table; from which fact only I can still boast of having
two legs. I need not say that the tea-things, breakfast, &c., were
broken and upset. I joined another party, and, having finished my
breakfast, I proceeded to meet the general, who had arrived to examine
our approaches in this direction.

[Illustration]




CHAPTER XXII.


The breached bastion was found to be a tough piece of masonry, extremely
thick and well put together; so we pegged away at its foundation. At
last some of the stones began to give warning that they were tired of
the fun, and would not stand it any longer--so down they came; and those
on the top, wishing to show their attachment, soon followed, and by the
following day, the breach looked ascendable.

When I went down to the breaching-battery, I saw my old friend, the
Irish sergeant, busy laying a gun. "Well, sergeant," said I, "what do
you think of the breach?"

He replied, "The divel a better within a day's march."

"Do you think we shall get in, sergeant?"

"The divel a fear of that, for there is not a living soul but what our
shells have kilt and destroyed; so that when you are in, you will have
nothing to do but shoot the remainder, and take the place in a moment."

"I am afraid you are too sanguine, sergeant," said I.

"Not at all, your honour: you will not find ten living men in the whole
fort that our shells have not destroyed. If you do, call Paddy Dogan a
spalpeen."

"Well," I answered, "we shall see, sergeant."

"Fait!" said he, "that's more than they will; it would do their dead
eyes good to take a peep at our brave boys getting up the breach."

Here was a general titter at the expense of poor Pat; and he exclaimed,
"Fait! you may laugh, but it's no laughing matter; how would you like
to be kilt yourselves? Answer me that question."

At the back of the breach stood the once splendid palace of its rightful
owner, but now one general mass of ruins. The breach was reported
practicable, and the storming ordered for the following morning, giving
time to knock off all defences behind which the enemy could secrete and
hide themselves, so as to annoy the storming party; but the keeledar of
the fort, seeing his haughty tower tumbling to the ground, his soldiers
falling victims to our shells wherever they showed themselves, and that
several fatal explosions had already occurred during the siege, began to
think seriously of giving up the fort, rather than stand the storm. He
had, indeed, lost a great number of his best men. A messenger was
therefore dispatched from the fort, stating that, if the general would
permit them to march out with their arms and private property, they
would give up the fort. The proposal stood on these grounds: their arms
were not worth ten pounds, and the whole of their property consisted of
what they stood in. Need there be a scruple in granting such a
proposition? Was there anything dishonourable in meeting such a
proposal, if only in mercy for human lives? Certainly not. The breach
was a most difficult one, and there is no question that, if they had
defended it, we should have lost fifty or more men; and it was by no
means clear to me, or any man who knew what a breach was, that our
success would have been at all a certain thing. Our brave and humane
general agreed at once to the terms proposed, much against the will of
some of the Company's officers, who attempted to attach some degree of
blame to his permitting them to march out with their arms. Our general,
however, by his own nice judgment, and the advice of his staff-officers,
some of whom had been years in the Company's army, overruled the
opinions of the firebrand sub in search of promotion, and the following
morning was appointed for their marching out. On viewing the garrison
the next morning, it was found to consist of fifteen hundred fine men,
well armed and equipped; so that we had no reason to regret that we had
not wantonly sacrificed men's lives. The garrison had been originally
two thousand strong, but was now reduced to about fifteen hundred, the
others having been killed and wounded. When we marched down, the gates
of the fort were closed, and the men had manned the ramparts. I was
desired to inform them, that the time for giving the fort up had
expired; and, if not at once complied with, the general must instantly
order the storming-party to proceed, for which purpose they had been
drawn up near the breach. At last the gates were thrown open, and the
keeledar, at the head of his men, marched out in column, with a firm
steady pace. He was a fine-looking man, and, indeed, so were all his
soldiers. Their wounded men were brought out by their comrades on cots.
These poor fellows we begged might be sent to our hospital, for the
purpose of being dressed. On passing the general, the keeledar saluted.
The general coolly returned; they marched out, and we marched in. The
inside of the gate was covered with dead bodies of men, horses,
bullocks, &c.; many of the houses were torn up by the roots, and the
smell was beyond anything dreadful. The palace had been torn to pieces,
and under its gigantic pillars protruded legs and arms of men and women.
The sight was truly horrifying, and I will hasten over it as fast as
possible. In the centre of the fort was found the old Armenian governor,
who had, during the siege, been confined in a cell, and almost starved
to death. I never in my life saw such a picture of woe as this poor
creature. He was about sixty years of age; his hair quite white. He was
the son of an Armenian by a native woman, and, consequently, of fair
complexion, which his confinement caused to look cadaverous. You could
almost have laid your finger in the furrows of his careworn cheek, and
his little black eyes were sunk deep into his head. He was permitted to
join his family, which had been sent to a small village during the
siege.

The fort presented one mass of desolation and poverty, the old garrison
having taken care of everything of value before they sold it. I had been
appointed, on this occasion, prize-agent for the staff of the army, and
commenced my search. It was rumoured that Jean Baptiste had in this fort
secreted thirty lacs of rupees, which we were resolved to find, if
possible. We dug up large pigs of lead, bars of iron, sheets of copper,
pits of grain, vats of ghee (a kind of butter), but no money. If
perseverance could discover this hidden treasure, we were resolved to
find it. After digging above twenty feet, and working our way under the
palace, we discovered a dungeon, or cell. Into this we descended, at the
risk of treading on reptiles. From this dungeon we traced several rooms
or cells, no doubt formerly the prisons of some captive beauties, till
they were reconciled to an illicit intercourse with their tyrants.
Searching every hole, and digging in every corner, we came at last to a
kind of wall, newly built up, through the top of which we could see a
door. This wall and door we soon forced to obedience, and we entered a
large room, recently cleaned and whitewashed. In the centre of this room
was a trap-door, with a large lock. Our hearts beat high with
expectation; but what was our surprise, when we found this tomb
contained the body of some poor murdered person, who had been buried
here! Thus ended our search; and the whole captured property sold for
fifteen hundred rupees, which we were obliged to hand over to Scindia
some time afterwards. Our next duty was to commit the dead to the earth.
In the performance of this unpleasant task, I had to follow one of the
Company's artillery to his last home. Observing one of the funeral party
lagging behind the rest, I asked him why he did not keep up. He
answered, that "He had had a great big fight with the deceased a short
time before he went dead, and he did not think the man had forgiven
him." "Poh! poh!" replied I, "the man cannot hurt you now he is
dead."--"Och, fait!" said he, "I beg your honour's pardon. I once knew
a man that was as dead as Barney Flynn's great-grandmother, come to
life; besides, the deceased said he would never rest, dead or no dead,
till he gave me a great big bating; and I should not like to provoke
him."--"Do not talk such nonsense to me," said I.--"Nonsense! your
honour; it's no such thing at all, at all; he was a mighty cunning chap
when alive, and who knows what he has learned since he went dead?" All I
could say I could not induce this man to approach till the corpse was
lowered into the grave, and that half filled, when he at last ventured
to look in, and said, "Fait! I believe you are snug enough now,
joy."--"Throw in a piece of earth as a signal that you part friends,"
said one of the men; but Paddy quickly replied, "No, no; that would be
striking the first blow;" and he went away immediately, no doubt full of
apprehensions that he should some time or other receive a nocturnal
visit from his comrade, who now slumbered in peace, secure in the cold
grave from war's alarms. So much for superstition!

Having buried our dead, we left one regiment of native infantry till
Scindia should send a more loyal garrison. We were afterwards given to
understand, that his highness was not at all obliged to us for knocking
his fort to pieces. We then turned towards home, and in a few days
reached Saugar to rest our weary limbs.

After the toils of war, and seeing no prospect of having anything more
to do, I obtained permission to visit my wife at Cawnpore, some four
hundred miles from Saugar. This was readily granted: I reached Cawnpore
in the space of fourteen days; and, in the embraces of an affectionate
wife, I forgot, for a time, the "pride, pomp, and circumstance of
glorious war." I remained in Cawnpore about eight or ten days, and the
place was at that time the seat of festivity and splendour. Dinners,
balls, and routs, followed each other in quick succession, so that, at
the end of the ten days, I was completely exhausted by dissipation. On
the eleventh day, I again bent my way to Saugar, to join the division.
My affectionate little partner accompanied me some miles on the road,
and would willingly have followed me to the field; but there are scenes
even on the line of march that must ever offend the eye of delicacy; and
I have always condemned the folly of those wives who have followed their
husbands to the field of battle. However ardent may be the affections of
such wives, the very act attaches to them want of delicacy: but what
will not woman do for the man she loves; she will even share with him
the cup of dishonour, and linger in his sight a short moment ere he is
plunged into eternity, to satisfy the offended laws of his country. Pity
it is either that women love so much, or that men deserve their love so
little! Dearly as I loved my wife, I could not expose her to the scenes
incident to an Indian encampment.

Having bidden her farewell, I started at speed, that I might not see her
again; yet I could not help stealing another last look, when I saw her
head was still turned towards me. I, would sooner go through the toils
of a campaign than suffer the heaviness I always experience at parting
with my family; but duty was my passport, and surmounted every
difficulty and obstacle, and in thirteen days I reached Saugar; but,
from being exposed to incessant rain, and afterwards to the scorching
sun, I had sown the seeds of a disease which nearly cost me my life,
though it was some time before it burst forth. It was supposed that the
division of the army to which I was attached, would be continued at this
station, for the purpose of watching the new-conquered provinces of
Saugar and Candish; so we began to build huts or asylums against the
winter, and we agreed to send for our wives--for what is man's life
debarred the pleasure of female society? Men are little better than
monsters without it. Wherever modest women are, there will always be a
becoming decorum and decency; but men, when long estranged from their
society, dwindle into gross habits; and the hilarity of an immodest
song, and the cup of inebriety, form their pleasures, and the summit of
their felicity. Our wives having been invited to join us, mine was the
first to set the example; and, although the journey was attended with
considerable danger, she reached me in four days, at the fort of Huttra,
whither I had proceeded to meet her. This personal risk, on her part, to
join me, could not but gratify my feelings and increase my love. In the
course of a month, ten ladies had arrived, and the little station was
the gayest of the gay. We generally met every day, either at dinner,
ball, or supper, and our hearts were as light as our pockets.

While we were at this station, there was a large monkey that was a
general nuisance, from the numerous robberies which he committed under
the dark mantle of night. He would pounce into shops, and would run off
with silks, satins, silver, gold, and indeed anything within his reach.
On one of these excursions, having taken a fancy to a shawl, he rushed
into the shop and grasped it; but the shawl being rather heavy and long,
it retarded his progress, and the master of the shop seized him by the
tail. He held fast, the monkey pulled; he called for help, the monkey
screamed; he kicked, the monkey bit. At last the owner of the shawl
seized the animal's tail with his grinders, and poor Jacko went off with
his prize, but minus some six inches of his tail. By the blood they
traced his steps to an old dilapidated mosque, where he was shot. Here
were found the spoils of many a midnight ramble, and which many an
honest neighbour laid under the stigma of having stolen. Such was the
power of this monkey, that he would have mastered many a man. These
animals, in India, I think are very sagacious and cunning, being petted
and fed by men, and frequently living in the houses of the Hindoos. I
recollect a young man, a cadet, who was proceeding up the river, and was
not accustomed to these creatures, incautiously shot one of the older
gentlemen out of several whom he saw. Even amongst these animals age is
honourable; they one, and all sallied out upon him, and he took to his
heels fast, throwing away his pouch, which was full of balls, shot, &c.
These they seized, and still pursued him, until he parted with his
shot-belt, and at last threw away his gun. As soon as they saw him
unarmed, they bit him terribly, and he escaped merely with life. The
boats to which he belonged were fortunately not far distant from him,
and from these a party was formed, who sallied out against his pursuers.
The first sight that presented itself was about a dozen hoary gentlemen
examining the contents of the shot-belt and pouch. Seeing themselves
overpowered, they wisely ran into the adjoining woods, taking with them
the pouch and shot-belt. The gun they declined having anything to do
with. I would caution young men proceeding up the river, to steer clear
of these artful and mischievous creatures.

In the midst of all our gaiety our little division was again put in
requisition, to proceed against the strong hill-fort of Asseerghur, some
three hundred miles from Saugar. The monsoons or rains had commenced,
and this sudden news distressed all the ladies exceedingly; but no
faint-hearted husband shammed sick to remain behind. In two or three
days we bade farewell to our fair spouses, and bent our way towards
Asseerghur. The weather was intensely hot, so much so, that in a large
double pool-tent, with tatties, or mats, suspended all round, made of
grass, and continually kept wet, the glass stood at mid-day, at 120 and
130, and, after a shower of rain, the earth was like a hotbed.
Notwithstanding this, we were obliged to proceed by forced marches, to
reach Asseerghur as soon as possible. Our force was not very large, but
our battering-train was considerable. The country in the immediate
vicinity of this fort is barren and desolate, infested with wild beasts
of every description, and many of our smaller cattle were carried away
at night by them. The forces of the other two Presidencies, Madras and
Bombay, had arrived before us, leaving a space for the Bengal division;
and a most dreary and barren spot it was. The earth was dried and
parched up, and nothing like vegetation could be seen except some
prickly bushes. Not a leaf or blade of grass condescended to smile upon
this spot. It was about a mile and a half from the fort, the gigantic
sides of which seemed, even at this distance, to hang over us. They were
really terrific even to look at; and, how we were to ascend such a
precipice would puzzle a wiser head than mine. We that morning
breakfasted with Major-General Doveton, commanding the whole of the
forces before Asseerghur; but, not having the least fancy to their
insipid dried fish and meats, we saved our appetites for our Bengal
luxuries, and made a hearty second breakfast on our return to our tents.

[Illustration: MADRAS, BENGAL AND BOMBAY NATIVE TROOPS OF SHIPP'S DAY.

From a Sketch taken at the time by the Earl of MUNSTER.]

The fort had been the property of Scindia, who had agreed to cede it to
the Company for some equivalent; but the governor had the impudence to
refuse to obey the orders of his master and the summons of the Company,
and to fire on the troops of both whenever they passed. This fellow
trusted, no doubt, to the supposed impracticability of the fort, and
therefore came to the resolution of keeping possession of it for
himself. The great natural strength of this hill seemed to defy the
combined power of the world. Human art and labour had also added to its
strength. The idea of ever being able to ascend such a place seemed
absurd and romantic, and to effect a breach would have been equally
impracticable. To mine it was beyond the power of human skill. From its
base to its summit was about two miles high, and, on a perpendicular
rock, from a hundred and fifty to two hundred feet high, stood strong
fortifications, with some very heavy cannon and ginjalls. In the centre
stood their grand mosque, with its two sharp spires pricking holes in
the clouds. At a considerable distance from this temple was a large
sheet of water, fed by a beautiful spring; and the troops could shelter
themselves from our shells in excavated rocks. The fort was about two
miles long, by three-quarters broad. On the south side was their
cuttrah, or walled town, and at the principal entrance above the town
innumerable underworks and bastions had been erected for its defence.
When the sun shed its bright beams on its gigantic and variegated sides,
it was truly beautiful. On the following morning I rose early to
accompany the general, who commenced his inspection of the spots pointed
out for our batteries. The top of the fort seemed entombed in the
slumbering clouds, and it was some time before they dispersed. The
position pointed out by the engineer, was upon a hill about two-thirds
of the way up the ascent to the perpendicular rock, and then our guns
were so elevated that we were obliged to sink the trail in the ground,
and, having but little or no room to recoil, they were much injured, and
we could do but little, if any good, except by knocking off the
defences. Indeed, success seemed out of the question, and the only
prospect we could foresee was to shell them into obedience. Our
shelling, therefore, went on systematically, and with great vigour.

One night, having dined with an officer of the Madras army, during the
time that we were before this place, and partaken rather too freely of
the Tuscan grape, I started towards home on my favourite mare, whose
speed not a horse in camp could equal, and lost my way. There was a
considerable space between the camp where I dined, and our own
encampment, the lights of which I thought I was standing fair for; but,
after riding a much greater distance than that between the two
encampments, and being in a thick jungle infested with tigers, I began
to reflect seriously on my situation, and for a moment I paused to
consider, under such circumstances, what was best to be done. How
short-sighted is mortal man! That brief moment had nearly been my last!
I had laid the reins of my mare over her neck, when in an instant she
gathered herself up, snorted, and wheeled right round. Fortunately for
me, I seized the mane, and, in an instant after, I saw, squatted down
and crouching to the ground, a huge tiger. To have run from him would
have been inevitable destruction. I therefore wheeled my mare round, and
pressed her on towards him, but she would not approach him. I had a pair
of loaded pistols in my holster-pipes. One of these I drew out,
resolving, however, not to throw away my fire. While endeavouring to
spur my mare on, and making all the noise I could, the ferocious animal
slunk off, to the great joy of both my mare and myself, and I was not
long before I reached my own tent.

I had some recollection of the place where this happened, as I always
made a point of making myself acquainted with the localities of the
encampment and its vicinity; so early the following morning I rode
towards the spot, which was not far from the road, and where I found
that the said tiger had feasted on a more delicious morsel--a nice
little ghinee (a small cow).

I would recommend to those who may chance to get into the vicinity of
such bad neighbours, never to run from them, but, if sufficient courage
can possibly be mustered, to run at them, or to stand and stare them
full in the face. A captain in the Company's service once told me, when
speaking of these savage beasts, that he was out shooting in some part
near Loodianah alone, and he had just discharged his last barrel at some
wild ducks, when a large tiger made his appearance. He had not time to
load again, but, for a time, stood his ground. He stared--the tiger
grinned, but did not seem inclined to come to the scratch. This said
captain, being a funny fellow, at last thought of a stratagem that was
likely to put his grinning neighbour to flight, which was by turning his
back to the animal, looking at him through his legs, and thus running
off backwards. He positively declared that, the moment the tiger saw
this strange metamorphosis, he took to his heels, and was out of sight
in an instant. I will not vouch for the verity of this tale, but I have
heard, since my arrival in England, that the same trick was actually
played on a savage mastiff belonging to a tan-yard, that would not
permit a stranger near the premises without tearing him to pieces, but
the moment he saw this curious figure he took refuge in a drying-house,
and for some time after on the least noise he would hide himself,
thinking, no doubt, it was his friend with his head between his legs
again. The reason on account of which I cannot take upon myself to vouch
for the veracity of my friend the captain, is this: I once tiffed in
company where this brave son of Mars was one of the party. The
conversation turned on the privations which soldiers and sailors are
frequently called on to endure. Some of the company said that, in the
course of their services, they had not tasted food for three days; some
mentioned a longer period. I said I did not believe that the system
could be sustained for more than seven days, if so long, without food or
some kind of sustenance. The captain, however, thought otherwise; and,
begging my pardon most politely, he protested that he had often, when in
the West Indies, lived himself for weeks without food; and that once,
for six months, he had nothing to eat but Cayenne pepper! This was
likely to be a hot man in dispute, so we left him in possession of the
field as well as of his story; and this is the reason why I would not
take upon me to vouch for the authenticity of his tiger adventure.

A few days after we had commenced the siege against this strong fort,
General Watson, commanding the Bengal division, came into my tent, and,
by the smile on his countenance, I could see he was much pleased. At
last he said, "Shipp, I have got some good news for you, which I am sure
will please you much." I replied, "General, good news is acceptable at
all times; what is it?"--"I have at last obtained permission," said the
general, "to lead in person my own column to the storm; and I am sure
you and Knollis will support me with your lives." I replied, "Whenever
my duty calls me, Sir, my life will be willingly risked in the service
of my country."--"I know it," said the general; "and, ere this day week,
I hope to plant Old England's banner higher on the tower of glory than
it ever has been. This fortification is, I believe, the highest in the
world, some fifteen hundred feet above the level of the plain." Some
short time after this the fort was surrendered, and the gallant general,
fortunately, still lives in the bosom of domestic bliss in his native
land. I say "fortunately," because, after the surrender of this strong
and impregnable fortress, it was deemed, by one and all, that it was
beyond the power of mortal ascent, and our beloved general must
infallibly have fallen a victim to his zeal. Many deeds of high daring
had marked the long and glorious career of this respected officer. He
had been in one corps (the 14th regiment) as subaltern and commander,
for the long period of three-and-thirty or four-and-thirty years,
without being a day absent from his duty; and he was universally beloved
for his urbanity and affability of manners. I should justly be accused
of ingratitude did I not take this opportunity of returning him my most
heartfelt thanks for his uniform generosity and disinterested friendship
to me, displayed on numberless occasions.

After shelling almost incessantly for several days, a great number of
the men in the fort were killed in going for water, which was about a
hundred yards from their hiding-places, and these became so offensive
that the garrison persuaded the keeledar to give up the fort as a
hopeless business. To this the keeledar, who was a most dastardly
coward, readily consented; for which purpose he dispatched a messenger
to say, that if he would cease shelling he would come to some amicable
arrangement. Our officers, foreseeing the total impossibility of our
success, complied in some slight degree, stipulating that they would
cease firing for a few hours. This was calculated to impress the
garrison with a conviction, that a further resistance on their part in
withholding the fort, would be only seeking their own destruction, and
imbruing their hands in their own blood; and that, as the English were
now inclined to be merciful, under the supposition that the garrison had
been seduced to disaffection by some artful rebel, it would be better
for them at once to surrender. The message returned by our commander was
that if they were sincere in their wish to give up the fort
unconditionally, firing for the present, from the shelling-batteries
only, would cease; and that, if the terms were not accepted, they would
re-commence with redoubled force. It was further agreed that one more
parley would be attended to. The messenger departed, and orders were
dispatched to the shelling-batteries to cease till further orders.

Natives, speaking of the height of this place, say that "none but the
crafty hawk, high lingering over his prey, or the morning lark, sweetly
soaring and singing over its young, could ever see the inside of
Asseerghur."

Some few days before our arrival, the cuttrah had been stormed and taken
by a division of the Bombay army, under the command of Colonel Frazer,
of the Royal Scots; but they found the detention of their little
conquered town warm work, it being so completely commanded, that every
street could be raked by the firing from the fort. Some part of the
upper-works of the fort were within three hundred yards of the town. Our
soldiers were obliged, therefore, to seek shelter in the temples and
huts. If they had not had the opportunity of retiring to these places,
the town would not have been tenable. Those who were obliged, in the
course of duty, to run from one place to another, had, the moment they
were observed, a hundred shots at them. The enemy, with some reason,
conceived that this occupation of the town was but a preparatory step to
an entry by escalade into their fort. They, therefore, had a strong
party constantly on the look-out for the opportunity of destroying all
whom they could attack, either by surprise or stratagem. Soldiers are
prone to look about them, and many of them will, in spite of all risks,
go in search of plunder. Some of our troops, on this occasion, paid
dearly for their disobedience of orders and violation of military laws.
The principal post held by our troops in this town, was a large mosque
or temple, of which the officers occupied one side, and the soldiers the
other. One by one the men stole off in search of plunder. The enemy,
having observed this, rushed on the remaining few, and the brave colonel
was killed in defending himself against unequal numbers. On the return
of these soldiers to their deserted post, what must have been their
mortification and panic to find their brave colonel butchered, through
their neglect and disobedience of all orders, and their poor wounded
comrades, who but an hour before had shared with them in glory,
weltering in their blood! What could have equalled their anguish, if
their minds had not sunk below the ebb of feeling? Young soldiers, let
this be a warning to you. It is but one instance, out of a great number
within my own knowledge, of the fatal effects of breach of discipline.
Whatever may be your prospect of gain, never be seduced to leave your
post. You are, by such transgression, guilty of three prominent offences
against the Articles of War: leaving your post before an enemy--death;
abandoning your officer--death; plundering--death. There is scarcely a
section in the Articles of War that does not touch this crime.

[Illustration]

[Illustration]




CHAPTER XXIII.


Ten o'clock came, but no messenger from the fort. A little time was
given, and the shelling-batteries did not re-commence till nearly eleven
o'clock; but when they did the top of the hill became one entire mass of
smoke and fire, and thus it continued till the afternoon, when a
messenger at length made his appearance, and informed the general that
the keeledar would be down immediately to ratify the treaty and give up
the fort. For this purpose the shelling was again stopped, and at about
two o'clock the keeledar began to descend in a palanquin, with three or
four followers. All the general and staff-officers in camp were directed
to assemble for the purpose of meeting this rebellious chief. General
Doveton's tent was the place of rendezvous. On the way to this tent the
people appointed to escort the keeledar took him through our park of
artillery, where there were some fifty guns, besides those then in use.
This keeledar was a most unseemly-looking man; a great fat buffalo of a
fellow, with enormous flitches of fat hanging over his hips. He was also
excessively dirty in his person and dress, and looked as if he had just
been turned out of an oil-shop. He entered the tent with all the
impudence of a nawab, chewing paun, and as though he was fully prepared
to receive a welcome greeting. In this he was disappointed. He was
desired to be seated, but his reception was cool and distant, and the
knitted brow of Major-General Sir John Malcolm, the political agent for
the government, portended no very flattering entertainment. When the
whole were seated, Sir John broke silence, by stating "that the British
army had no time to lose in unnecessary parley, and that, therefore, any
argument of his would be waste of words, and unavailing, as nothing
would suffice but the unconditional surrender of the fort to the troops
of his government, and that he should, in his person, answer to his
master, Scindia, for his rebellion and disloyalty." Here the fat
keeledar began to gather himself up into speaking order, and at last
mumbled out, that he was surprised that a person so well conversant with
the Eastern customs and usages of war should propose such a thing as
laying down their arms, as Sir John must know, that a rajah-poot would
sooner suffer ten thousand deaths than be deprived of his arms. He
concluded by protesting that for him to attempt to enforce such a thing
would be endangering his own life. Sir John replied that he did well
know the customs of the country and the characters of rajah-poot
soldiers; but the keeledar must keep in view that these were terms
offered to rebels, whose heads were the just forfeit of their
disobedience and rebellion, and that, therefore, if they persisted in
their rebellion, he should not advise the government to mitigate the
penalty a single jot, but to hang every one of them. This was pronounced
with some degree of displeasure, and the man of fat, not doubting in the
least that of course he was included in the number to be hanged, began
to quake for fear. He turned round and reflected for some time, his eye
fixed on the dark and displeased countenance of Sir John Malcolm. At
last he repeated that he dared not propose such terms to the garrison.
"But," added he with the greatest effrontery and impudence, his villany
suddenly bursting forth, while he at the same time "grinned horribly a
ghastly smile," "could you not _promise_ them their arms and property,
and, when they are fairly out, pounce upon them and take them from
them?"

General Doveton, Sir John Malcolm, and half-a-dozen brigadiers, at this
diabolical proposition rose simultaneously, and I really thought Sir
John would have jumped down the rascal's throat, or have cut him to
pieces on the spot, as he warmly replied, "Rebel! what grounds have you
for supposing that the English could ever stoop to commit such an act of
infamy? Can you, or any native of India, adduce a single instance of our
government's having ever acted so treacherous and cowardly a part? No,
miscreant; were your fort ten thousand times as strong, and ten thousand
times as high as it is, we will either take it or level it with the
plain. I cannot imagine how you have dared to make such an offer before
these gentlemen. It would serve you right to cleave you to the ground
for such an insult, and we can only treat such a proposition as arising
from the baseness of your own heart. I desire that you will this moment
return to your fort, and dare not again to insult this assembly with
your vile propositions. Go and fight your fort, and we will soon force
you to do what we now in pity offer. Go this moment, or I will give
directions for the shelling to commence." Upon this the man of
Lambertian breed began to shake in a frightful manner; but at last he
said, "I am out of danger, and will keep so; I will not return to the
fort to be killed." Sir John replied, "But you shall, if I am obliged to
carry you on my back." One of the officers present--I think General
Watson--observed, "Then, Sir John, you would indeed have a load of
infamy on your shoulders, that you could not easily shake off."

The keeledar, finding that he had gone his length, began now to smooth a
little, and said that he would endeavour to induce the garrison to give
up their arms, but that he dreaded the result. I caught his deep sunk
eye, which beamed forth the most malevolent malice and hatred. I could
see an innate working of revenge in his soul; but he at last said he
would guarantee to give up the fort by ten o'clock the following day,
upon the terms of unconditional surrender. To this he pledged his word,
and offered to ratify the treaty under his hand and seal.

After much consultation, and apparent reluctance on our part, it was
agreed that we would accept of the surrender, but with this
proviso--that, if they did not march out by the hour agreed on, the
negotiation should be considered as entirely closed, and that no further
proposition would be listened to.

The keeledar then left the tent in sore displeasure, and rolled into his
palanquin. Sir John Malcolm was as good as his word, for he saw him to
the very entrance of his fort. Multitudes assembled to meet their
infamous and treacherous governor; but what could they possibly expect
from such a man? If he would rebel against his government, would he not
deceive his garrison? A soldier doing the former is capable of
committing any other crime, however enormous it may be. This fellow
returned to his garrison and told them that he had frightened the
English to grant them their arms, their property, and everything they
wished. Under these terms the whole garrison actually marched out with
their property, arms, &c, and rendezvoused under the hill, where we had
a strong party ready to march in. They were in number about seven or
eight hundred, poor half-starved-looking creatures, and some of them
almost naked. Sir John, having severely admonished them for their
rebellious conduct, desired them to ground their arms and property. The
infamy of the keeledar then came out; and, but for the interference of
our troops, his men would have torn him to pieces. When he was asked if
he had really held out those promises as from us, he laughingly replied,
"I had no other method of getting them out, and I was not fool enough to
remain in that fort to have my brains blown out. They are now in your
power; do what you please with them. I have done my part; now do yours."
The keeledar was immediately placed in confinement, and Sir John thus
addressed the wretched-looking creatures who had constituted the
garrison:--"I have every reason to believe that you came out under the
idea that you should keep your arms and little property, and with the
understanding that this indulgence had been granted by the English. No
such thing was ever promised by us, nor could a rebellious garrison
expect such an indulgence from the government, when death alone was the
penalty of such conduct; but as you have been deceived by your base
keeledar, into a belief that such terms were offered by us, and have
surrendered the fort under this confident expectation, we will not
enforce the terms insisted on through your treacherous keeledar, but
permit you to depart as you are. You may therefore go, and I would
advise you to retire quietly to your homes, and there to make your peace
with your justly-offended master, Scindia."

This party was escorted some miles from camp, and the keeledar was sent
a prisoner to his master; but what became of him I never heard. There
can be little doubt, however, that his refusing to give up this fort was
by positive instructions received from Scindia himself, who was closely
connected with the conspiracy formed against the British government,
during the Pindaree campaign; but the presence of the Marquis of
Hastings, with the centre division of the grand army, under the very
walls of his capital, kept that combined conspiracy from breaking forth.

From the tremendous height of this fort, the shelling at night was truly
splendid and magnificent. I have seen ten and fifteen shells soaring in
the air together, and, from the extreme height from which they were
obliged to be thrown, they looked like falling stars. When they burst,
the report below was like thunder.

Thus ended the campaign of 1818-19, and we had no occasion to complain
of not having had the honour of storming the fort of Asseerghur, as all
the guns in the world could never have effected a breach. Where we did
attempt a breach, our twenty-four-pound balls only served to knock off
little bits of the more prominent and projecting rocks, and to make the
ascent more difficult and formidable, by removing the very pieces of
rock by which we had a chance of ascent. The part which we attempted to
breach was a kind of nook, which had the appearance of once having been
a waterfall. I am confident, if we had battered at it till doomsday, we
never could get up; and, even if we could, a dozen old women might have
killed us every one by rolling down stones upon us. I therefore think it
a most fortunate event that this fort was given up without being
stormed, and I certainly may be considered as speaking feelingly on this
subject, for, my gallant general having volunteered (being the oldest
colonel in camp) to lead in his own column, it is not very probable that
I should have left him alone to find his way to the breach. Often when I
viewed this spot, did I think, "Here ends my career;" and so strong was
this impression on my mind, that I began to fix my eye on some little
romantic spot where I should like to be interred, should I have here
ended my days; for I was convinced of the total impossibility of
success. I began to arrange my papers, and had fully made up my mind to
end my career, as I had commenced it, in the field of glory. But I had a
wife--ay, and a fond wife too, which reflection much embittered the
prospect before me. Had I been without this tie, it would have been my
heart's first choice to have ended my days in the service of my country.
When I say this, I am far from pretending that I had any particular wish
to die; but had it been my fate, I would, from choice, sooner have made
my exit fighting for my country's liberty and glory, than on the downy
bed; but Providence has ordered it otherwise.

In the afternoon we went to examine the fort; and every step I took more
thoroughly convinced me of the utter impossibility of any earthly power
ever taking it by storm. I was obliged to halt a dozen times in
ascending, quite at my leisure, towards the grand entrance. By the time
I reached the gate I was completely exhausted, and I was ten minutes in
getting to the top. If we had stormed this place, it would, beyond
question, have been the grave of hundreds. On the walls were huge
stones, piled up for our destruction, some of them weighing two or three
hundred-weight, which a child might have pushed off. When once up, the
eye extended along a considerable level plain, on which were fields,
woods, and gardens. In the centre was a large tank of water, as clear as
crystal, but purple streams of blood lingered on its margins and banks.
Many dead bodies lay by the side of this tank. Some of them must have
been shot in the very act of drinking. The stench was dreadful. Their
sacred temple was contaminated and defiled with every kind of dirt and
filth, and their gods wore marks of disfigurement from our shells. One
had lost a head, but which, by the by, he could well spare, as he had a
dozen. In one of the excavations of the rock was discovered a woman
lying dead, with a dead infant in her arms. She was seated on a large
stone, with her right side reclining on another rock or side of the
excavation. Her left hand grasped the child round the body, and on her
right reclined her head. The head of the infant, which I should suppose
was about a year old, hung over her right knee. The woman had not a
bruise about her; but it was supposed she had fled there from those
destructive instruments of death, the shells. Near her lay several dead
and mutilated bodies, in a state of putrefaction. She was a young woman
about twenty, and well dressed. On inquiry among the prisoners, we
learned that her husband had been killed by one of our first shells, and
thrown into the very hole near which she was found, but it was not known
whether she had followed him there, or whether she died before him; for
the soldiers were so panic-struck that they could not directly answer
the most simple question. Behind the temple lay a headless trunk. We
understood that this was the body of the head priest of the said temple;
that he was boasting of his being proof against anything that could be
hurled against him by his hated foe; and, as we were informed by a
surviving mendicant, scarcely had the superstitious words escaped his
mouth, than he fell, a headless body, to the ground. His head, we were
told, was found some yards from the spot where he lay. We immediately
went in search of it, and found it eleven paces from the body, but not a
human feature was left. The face was literally torn to pieces. To sketch
the horrible scenes that presented themselves would fill a volume. I
shall mention but one more; a shell had burst between a man's legs, and
had literally split him up to the neck.

The large masses of congealed blood, seen at almost every step between
the temple and tank, were convincing proofs that the loss of life must
have been very great; but most of the dead bodies had been thrown over
the walls, to find their way to the bottom of some excavated rock or
tiger's den. The place altogether exhibited nothing but signs of poverty
and distress, and they must have been, after the loss of the town,
literally in a state of starvation. From this eminence the prospect was
extensive and truly beautiful. The city of Borhanpore was plainly
visible; and, although fourteen miles distant, such was the height of
this place, that it seemed almost to hang over it. Men in the several
encampments looked like babes. When the evening closed in, I found the
atmosphere chilly and cold. This soon sent us down to the warmer regions
below, where the glass, at the cool of eve, stood at eighty-five, and
sometimes at ninety. The height of the thermometer at that hour, when
the evening breeze is cool and salubrious, was no doubt occasioned by
the great heat absorbed by the earth during the day. In India, it is
quite common to inhale the sweet and refreshing breeze of eve, when,
under foot, the ground is like a hotbed. The soil here was a kind of
glittering red sand, and in some places rocky; and we were not at all
sorry that we were about to leave it.

[Illustration]




CHAPTER XXIV.


The combined army was now on the point of marching from Asseerghur,
after the cession of that fortress.

We bent our way once more towards cantonments, accompanying Sir John
Malcolm to his new station of Mhow, for the purpose of visiting the
celebrated cities of Indore and Ougein. This was some miles out of our
direct route; but no traveller ought to pass such places without viewing
the splendour and magnificence of ancient architecture for which those
two cities are celebrated. A careful survey of such places will well
compensate the traveller for going out of his way; feed his astonished
mind with contemplation for years to come; and impress him with the
conviction, that the system of architecture in Europe, in comparison
with that of the East, is but in its infancy.

The approach towards Mhow is very difficult and fatiguing. One ghaut
which we were necessarily obliged to ascend was frightful even to look
at. The road had been scooped out from the side of the hill, which from
its base was almost perpendicular, and seemed to defy mortal ascent.
When I arrived at the bottom, I saw elephants, camels, and horses, men,
women, and children, that seemed hanging on the projecting bosom of the
flinty rock, or suspended from the clouds. When the elephants had
reached the summit, they looked like small ponies, and the men like
little dark specks in the sky. About two hundred yards from the top was
a strong gateway, and two large bastions, for the protection of this
pass into Holkar's provinces. Upon the hill was a strong stone-built
fort, belonging to that chieftain, which was well filled with guns and
men. This hill, from its base to its summit, is more than two miles.
There are several wells during the ascent, for the accommodation of
travellers, fed by springs hewn out of the solid rock. It is a good
day's march to complete the ascent of this hill; and how cattle get up,
with their enormous loads on their backs, is to the spectator wonderful
to behold. Nothing of moment occurred on the journey, save some broken
shins and knees; and, for three days after this trip, I was so stiff
that I could scarcely move. We encamped on the top of this hill, and the
view from its summit comprised an extent of at least fifty miles. The
people below seemed of another world. In the lowlands the atmosphere was
intensely hot and sultry; but upon the hill it was pure, cool, and
salubrious, so that we seemed quite in another country. When we again
set out on our journey, we travelled about a hundred miles without again
descending. The whole of this distance the country was one general flat,
and we did not find any descent till we got near Callenger, where the
ghaut is nearly as high.

In two days more we reached the new station of Mhow, the residence of
Sir John Malcolm, with whom we spent two pleasant days. Sir John was as
hospitable as he was brave, and his tables groaned under the luxuries of
the season. He possesses a profundity of wit; so that, wherever he is,
the whole company are sure to be on the broad grin. I should recommend
all people subject to liver complaints to pay Sir John a visit, if
opportunity favours them, and I would wager ten to one that, in one
month, he would laugh most of them out of their complaints. I was myself
suffering under a violent attack when I was his guest, and the smallest
motion, more particularly that caused by laughter, was attended with
most excruciating pain; but our host could almost make a dead man laugh.
The consequence was, that I laughed to some purpose, for I actually got
rid of my complaint. Sir John generally made it a point of getting me
close to him. He said to me one morning, "Shipp, did I ever tell you the
story of my being invited to breakfast off a dead colonel?" I answered,
"No, Sir John; nor are my poor sides in a state to hear it."--"Oh, but I
must tell you: it's rather a serious story than otherwise." Finding
there was no escape, I put both my hands to my sides (a necessary
precaution to prevent them from bursting) and listened attentively. Sir
John had a peculiar manner of relating anecdotes, which, for effect, I
have never seen equalled; and a sort of squeaking voice, in which he
generally spoke, especially when pleased, added greatly to the drollery
of his stories. "I was invited to breakfast," said Sir John, "with a
queer old colonel of the Bombay Artillery. This colonel was famous for
giving good breakfasts, so I accepted his invitation, and went to his
residence rather early, where I walked without ceremony into the
breakfast-room. It is customary in India, when breakfast-things are
laid, to throw a table-cloth over the whole, to keep the flies off. I
thought it strange that I did not see a single servant; but I walked up
and down the room, very contentedly, for nearly a quarter of an hour. At
last I got quite hungry, so I thought I would help myself to a biscuit.
For this purpose, I lifted the end of the cloth, and the first object
that met my eye was--the colonel's head!" Just at this instant Sir John
Malcolm struck me a violent blow on the shoulders, which so startled me,
that I really thought the dead colonel was on my back. From that time,
however, I lost all symptoms of the liver complaint.

After a short time our generous entertainer good-naturedly accompanied
us to Indore, where the British resident, Mr. Wellesley, treated us in a
most splendid and hospitable manner. He took us to visit the court of
young Holkar, who, a short time before, had rebelled against the
government, in consequence of which his troops had been dreadfully cut
up at Mahidpoor, so that we could not expect a very cordial greeting.
We, however, all proceeded thither, mounted on elephants, and we were
received at the outer gates, by the junior officers of Holkar's court,
rather coolly. Here we dismounted, and in the inner court we were met by
some officers of higher rank, by whom we were conducted to a long room,
on which was spread a clean white cloth, with innumerable pillows and
cushions for the purpose of lounging on. Young Holkar rose on the
entrance of the resident, and we all in our turn had a hug at him. He
was a dirty-looking boy, about thirteen years of age, shabbily dressed,
and who, it was said, has never been known to laugh out. After the usual
greeting, and sprinkling of scents, we could see his rancour working
within him. It was Sir John who had given his troops such a drubbing,
and he could not, even on this occasion, conceal the hatred that rankled
in his heart towards the English. The recollection of the disastrous
defeat of his troops rushed across his mind, no doubt, the moment he saw
Sir John Malcolm, and it left evident traces on his features, that
indicated the most malevolent feelings towards his visitors. It appeared
to be with difficulty that he could behave with decent civility; but,
from fear of offending the British resident, he was compelled, with his
courtiers and ministers, to affect a cordiality which he did not feel.
Sir John Malcolm, however, soon disturbed their ceremonious gravity,
which he converted into peals of laughter, so that the room resounded
with shouts of merriment; and the before frowning rajah, who was reputed
unable to laugh, actually threw himself on his back, and laughed most
lustily. It was a considerable time before we could re-establish order;
after which, an interesting conversation took place, which was followed
by the distribution of presents, in which the young rajah was liberal,
and we broke up much more friendly than we had met. We all returned to
the resident's house, to a most splendid dinner.

On the following morning we bade farewell to our hospitable friends, Sir
John Malcolm and Mr. Wellesley, and bent our way towards Ougein by
forced marches, to make up for the time we had spent at Mhow and Indore.
The Bengal division did not return with us, but went the direct road to
Saugar, where they arrived some days before us. In two days we reached
Ougein, and encamped in a small tope of trees, about a mile from the
city, which is situated on the banks of the river Scend, opposite to
which are the beautiful and extensive gardens, once the favourite resort
of Scindia, but which, of late years, he has not visited. The once
splendid palace of this ancient city has been actually permitted to
tumble to pieces, and this seat of oriental magnificence may now be said
to be the habitation of snakes, scorpions, and every kind of reptiles.
The beautiful pleasure-grounds are still kept in some kind of order, as
they are the haunts of mendicant priests, who willingly sojourn here,
and by whom these gardens are considered as a holy place of worship. In
the morning the rippling stream of the Scend is crowded with these
Brahmin priests, sanctifying their hoary heads, as they suppose, with
the pure waters of this fair and sparkling stream, and offering worship
to their gods.

In the course of the afternoon we visited the old city, that had been
buried by an earthquake. We could distinctly see tops of temples, trees,
and houses, and there are still many wide and yawning excavations in the
earth. At the extreme end of this old town stands the palace, in a state
of dilapidation and decay. Some few priests reside in what was once the
zenanah, the lower apartments of which run into the gliding stream of
the Scend, and are washed by this beautiful river passing through them.
Here we bathed, to the great annoyance and mortification of the priests
who resided there, who did not fail to tell us in plain terms, that we
had contaminated and polluted the sacred stream.

We next visited the subterraneous passage which was reported to reach
from Ougein to the city of Benares, some two thousand miles! We
commenced our exploration of this place by candle-light, and every ten
yards descended into rooms almost square, till the place became so damp
and chilly, that we were induced to return; but, even from the short
distance we had accomplished, we could easily discover that it led to
the palace, which stood about a quarter of a mile from it, and had no
doubt been a secret passage to the zenanah, for some nefarious purpose.
These subterraneous passages to the palaces of the great must have been
designed for purposes dark as they are mysterious; and, could these dark
and lonely cells but speak, I fear they would tell many a woful tale.
Over the mouth, or entrance, of this subterraneous passage, was a kind
of old gateway, and on its still tottering towers were sculptured many
tales of wonder, as false as they were strange. Wishing to see
everything worth beholding, we commenced our march, by descending three
or four steps into a square room, that was perfectly green from the damp
vapour rising from the ground. In one corner of this room, which was
about six feet square, we discovered a wrinkled old man reposing on some
ashes, his hair white and his beard of great length. He viewed us with
the eye of a lynx, and, having bid us the usual greeting of the morning,
he at the same time sat up, and, assuming a considerable degree of
self-consequence, he demanded where we were going, from whence we came,
and what were our intentions. I was appointed interpreter, and I replied
that we wished to see this wonderful subterraneous passage. He replied,
"Yes, wonderful indeed! two thousand miles dug out of the bowels of the
earth by manual labour, and which cost as much money as would purchase
another world; but," continued he, "where are your provisions--your
oil--your Koran? If you wish to explore this great wonder of man's
power, you surely would not attempt it without first invoking Almighty
aid! The journey is long, dangerous, and tedious."--"How far, then,"
said I, "does the excavation extend, that so many precautions are
required?"--"To the famous city of Benares," replied he. "There may be
found, though scarcely known to mortal man, the other entrance. This is
as true as it appears wonderful to you who are unacquainted with these
hidden mysteries. If you doubt my assertion, go on, and your own eyes
will convince you of the truth of what I have told you." We proceeded
through some three or four rooms, descending two or three steps down to
each, till a chilly dampness told us to return. We did so, and, not
wishing to offend old grey-beard by evincing any disbelief of what we
had heard, we gave him a few rupees, which he seized with all the
avidity of a miser. His cunning eye sparkled again when he found the
rupees within his grasp, and he bowed to the ground in token of thanks.
He told us many stories, as wonderful as they were false: amongst the
rest, the following:--That some of his holy sect (Brahmins) had, a short
period before, attempted to explore this passage; but, when they had
proceeded about half way, some of them died. The others consulted
whether it was more prudent to proceed to the accomplishment of their
design, or at once return, while it was certain that their oil and
provisions would last them. They agreed to return, and they reached the
spot from which they had first started, after an absence of some months.
The hoary-headed mendicant told this barefaced falsehood with all the
solemnity of truth, and confirmed it by emphatically calling on his
Maker to witness his assertion. We did not think it prudent to dispute
his word till we were fairly out of his clutches; but, just as we were
about to take our departure, I told him that what he had asserted was
nothing but a delusion to exact money from the English traveller, and
that we could plainly see, from the nature of the passage, that it was a
secret inlet to the great palace, for some dark and murderous purpose.
This he denied with all the effrontery of which these people are
capable, and we parted on no very friendly terms. This same old fellow
accounted for the earthquake having visited the city of Ougein in the
following happy manner. He said that a white man had sojourned there
some three or four years, subsisting on the gifts of the benevolent. "He
spoke fluently all the Oriental tongues, was affable, and became
generally esteemed. Having accumulated some money, he built a little
temple, and, in two or three years, gained a considerable number of
converts to his religion, and became so powerful in his arguments, and
so persuasive in his discourses, that the Brahmin priests held a
consultation. The result of this meeting was never published, for it was
on that day--that long-to-be-remembered day--that the great visitation
overtook this city, engulfing myriads of its inhabitants. This was a
mark of their god's displeasure for permitting this ancient city to be
defiled by the erection of a Christian temple. The temple was wholly
swallowed up; but, Sir, strange to say, some one short minute before
this, the white man had gone to a small school in a distant village, and
escaped the catastrophe. On the same eve, however, he disappeared, and
naught has been heard of him since that day--a day registered in blood
in the annals of this ancient city."

We visited every place about Ougein worth seeing, and in the evening
returned to our tents, where our hospitable general had, as usual,
provided a sumptuous dinner, with every luxury of the season. On the
following morning we stood towards Saugar, _viâ_ Bopaul and Belsah, old
Pindaree haunts; but nothing of moment occurred on the road, save that
some of our servants lost their way in the night, and were never more
heard of by us. There can be little doubt that they had fallen victims
to banditti, for which this part of the country is notorious.

We soon arrived safe at Saugar, where we were met with open arms by our
affectionate wives. At this station all was now merriment and joy. Such
is the life of a soldier! He no sooner furls his victorious banner, and
sheaths his blood-stained sabre in the scabbard of peace, than, amid the
revels of the fascinating and the gay, or in the more calm, but far
sweeter enjoyment of domestic felicity, he loses all thought of
"grim-visaged war."

I was blessed with a most affectionate partner, who shared in all my
joys, and soothed me under all my sorrows. Her fond epistles to me, when
in the field, were filled with expressions of pity for the poor deluded
creatures with whom we were at war. She was the pillar of my best hopes;
my bright star of happiness; my monitor in the hour of peril, and my
sure refuge in distress. She had but one fault--that she doted where she
should but have loved.

       *       *       *       *       *

But, quitting recollections which, from subsequent events, have been
rendered painful to me, perhaps the insertion of the following account
of the extraordinary evidence given by an Irish sergeant before a
court-martial may be tolerated, if only in consideration of its being
the last of my Irish anecdotes.

_President._--Well, sergeant, recollect you are upon your oath to speak
the truth, and nothing but the truth, so help you God. State what you
know touching the crime against the prisoner.

_Sergeant._--I will, your honour. The other morning, when I was fast
asleep on my cot, with my eyes open, I heard the prisoner there himself
say to Patrick Gaffy, in a whisper--and sure I could tell his voice a
mile off if I could hear him--that he would never rest day or night till
he had kilt and murdered Corporal Ragon, becase he was always down upon
him, and he would never let him alone besides.

_President._--You have a strange way, sergeant, in giving your evidence:
you say that you heard the prisoner, when you were asleep, tell Patrick
Gaffy, in a whisper, that he would kill Corporal Ragon. Mind what you
are about, Sir.

_Sergeant._--A whisper, your honour! Fait, but it was such a whisper as
you might have heard, if you had been on the look-out, all over the
barrack, with your eyes shut.

_President._--But you say that you were asleep?

_Sergeant._--So I was, your honour; but the noise waked me; and I shut
my eyes so that I might be sure I heard him.

_President._--Can you hear in your sleep?

_Sergeant._--Fait, can I. About a month ago, I was as sound as a
mackerel, when, sure enough, I heard a man calling me by my name; and,
when I opened my eyes, I saw him standing by my bedside, and he said he
had been calling me for a long time.

_President._--Perhaps you can see in your sleep also?

_Sergeant._--By the powers, your honour, you may say that; for the other
morning I catched myself at that self-same thing.

_President._--How was that, sergeant?

_Sergeant._--Fait! the other morning, when I was fast asleep, I felt my
eyes, and found them wide awake.

_President._--Probably you can _always_ hear in your sleep?

_Sergeant._--Not when my eyes are shut, your honour; for then I am quite
deaf.

_President._--Do you ever walk in your sleep?

_Sergeant._--Never, your honour, after I lay down; but I did once, when
a boy.

_President._--Which you perfectly recollect, of course?

_Sergeant._--Yes, your honour: I shall never forget it, because I have
good cause to remember it.

_President._--What may that be, sergeant?

_Sergeant._--Why, your honour, I was about ten years old when I walked
in my sleep, and I found myself wide awake in a horse-pond that stood
near my father's house.

_Member._--Well, but you said at the commencement of your evidence, that
you were asleep, and heard the prisoner now before the court make use of
the threat towards Corporal Ragon.

_Sergeant._--Fait! did I, on my oath, and that's no lie, either.

_Member._--Clearly and distinctly heard the identical words?

_Sergeant._--Clear as mud, your honour.

_Member._--Yet you say the words were given in a whisper?

_Sergeant._--Yes, your honour, but it was so loud, there were several
men besides me who heard it, that were asleep at the same time, and not
so near as I was, becase they slept at the other side of the barrack.

_President._--You must either be a confounded oaf, or you wish to impose
upon the court. Take care you do not yourself become a prisoner and be
tried before this very court for perjury. I suppose you mean to say that
the prisoner's talking awoke you?

_Sergeant._--Fait! that's the very thing.

_President._--Then you heard the expressions after you awoke?

_Sergeant._--Fait! I did.

_President._--They were spoken quite loud?

_Sergeant._--- They were, your honour.

_President._--Your evidence is most extraordinary. Prisoner, have you
any questions to put to this witness?

_Prisoner._--Yes, if you plase, your honour. Where was I standing when
you heard me make use of the words you have been after mintioning to the
court?

_Sergeant._--Behind the pillar in the barrack.

_Prisoner._--Did you see me at the time?

_Sergeant._--Fait! did I, plain enough.

_President._--What do you suppose was the distance of this pillar from
you, sergeant?

_Sergeant._--About twelve feet, your honour.

_President._--You must have pretty good hearing, then, to hear a man
whisper at that distance.

_Sergeant._--The divel better hearing in the world.

_President_--How far, now, do you think you could hear a gunshot?

_Sergeant._--Ten miles off, if I was near enough.

_President._--You stupid fellow, if the sound reaches you, you must
hear.

_Sergeant._--Yes, your honour, but I meant that if I was wide awake I
could hear a gun ten miles off, if the report was loud enough. I heard
the guns at Vittoria when my eyes were shut and I was twenty miles off.

_President._--If I could suppose for a moment that your extraordinary
evidence proceeded from any other motive than utter ignorance, I would
this moment try, break, and flog you; but granting that your testimony
proceeds entirely from that channel, you are no longer fit for a
non-commissioned officer, and I shall speak to the commanding-officer to
reduce you.

The prisoner was released, and the proceedings terminated. It appeared
afterwards, that all the witness meant to say was, that he was awake,
but had his eyes shut, when the prisoner made use of the words alluded
to.

       *       *       *       *       *

We did not remain at Saugar for above a month, after which the division
of the army to which I was attached was ordered to be broken up, and I
proceeded to rejoin my own corps at Cawnpore. This was in July, 1819;
from which period to the beginning of the year 1821, my time was spent
in domestic quiet, in the performance of the station-duties of my
profession, and in social intercourse with my brother officers. About
this period I was raised to the rank of lieutenant, and, to add to the
happiness which I then enjoyed, on the 22nd of March, 1821, I became a
father by the birth of a little boy. Little did I then think that this
blessing was the forerunner of much evil to me and mine; but just at this
crisis I entered into an agreement with the late Lieutenant-Colonel,
then Major, Browne, to run, in partnership with him, at the ensuing
Cawnpore races. My father-in-law being then in a bad state of health,
and just about to leave India, I obtained leave of absence for six
months, and accompanied him to Calcutta. Here I was to purchase certain
horses, &c., for the races; and the circumstances connected with this
unfortunate racing transaction led ultimately to a court-martial, the
sentence of which was as follows:

    "The court, having maturely weighed and considered the evidence for and
    against the prisoner, together with what he has urged in his defence,
    is of opinion that he is guilty of both the charges preferred against
    him, which being in breach of the Articles of War, it does sentence
    him, Lieutenant John Shipp, of his Majesty's 87th regiment, to be
    discharged his Majesty's service.

                                              "Approved and confirmed,
                                 (Signed)           "EDWARD PAGET,
                                           "_General, Commander-in-Chief_."

Attached to the sentence was the following recommendation of the
court:--

    "The court having performed a painful but imperative duty, in
    finding the prisoner guilty, beg respectfully, though earnestly, to
    recommend him to the clemency of his excellency the
    commander-in-chief. In presuming to express a wish that mercy may be
    extended to the present case, the court are impressed with a hope
    that the gallantry so frequently displayed by the prisoner, the
    numerous wounds he has received, and the high and apparently merited
    character which he has hitherto borne, will appear to his excellency
    sufficient grounds for the court's thus warmly interesting
    themselves in the prisoner's fate, and urging with anxious
    solicitude the present recommendation.

    "Before closing their proceedings, the court deem it a justice due
    to Lieutenant-Colonel Browne, to express their opinion that his
    conduct, as far as it has come before them, has been honourable to
    himself and indulgent towards the prisoner."


    _Remarks by the Commander-in-Chief._

    "Lieutenant Shipp has thus, by his persevering resistance to the
    advice of his late most respected commanding-officer, of the general
    of his division, and of the commander-in-chief, brought upon himself
    the heavy penalty of the forfeiture of his commission. Although
    these are circumstances calculated greatly to aggravate the offences
    of this officer, still the commander-in-chief is willing to hope
    that, in yielding, as far as he feels it is consistent with his
    duty, to the earnest intercession of the court, he runs no risk of
    shaking the foundations of discipline and subordination. The
    sentence of the court is accordingly remitted; but as, under all the
    circumstances of the case, the commander-in-chief deems it quite
    impossible that Lieutenant Shipp should continue to do duty with the
    87th regiment, he grants him leave of absence from it, and shall
    recommend that he be removed to the half-pay list.

    "The foregoing orders to be entered in the General Order-Book, and
    read at the head of every regiment in his Majesty's service in
    India.

                    "By order of his Excellency the Commander-in-Chief,
                        (Signed)              "THOMAS M'MAHON,
              (A true copy.)              "_Colonel, Adjutant-General._"
    "_J Bowes, Lieutenant and Adjutant,
    87th Regiment._"

On the tenth day of the proceedings, Colonel Browne, being examined on
oath, is questioned by the court:--

    _Question._--"How long have you known the prisoner, and what was
    your opinion of his character previous to the misunderstanding
    between you and him?"

    _Answer._--"I have known the prisoner since the year 1816. He was in
    the light company with me for a considerable time, and distinguished
    himself highly at Hattrass. I always considered him, and indeed know
    him to be, up to the present moment, one of the best officers in his
    Majesty's service."[16]

[Illustration]

[Illustration]

FOOTNOTES:

[16] A summary of the court-martial proceedings (which in the original
covered 300 foolscap folios) is given in the first edition of Shipp's
"Memoirs," but omitted from the edition of which the present volume is a
reprint.--ED.




CHAPTER XXV.


When an officer has been tried by an honourable military tribunal,
composed of fifteen British officers, and the sentence of the
court-martial has been sanctioned and approved by a most merciful and
gracious sovereign, it were as fruitless, as it would be highly improper
and presumptuous, for the sentenced individual to urge anything further
in his defence. I, therefore, as a sincere admirer of my country's laws,
bow most humbly to my fate; I love my country as truly as ever I did,
and would as willingly as ever risk my life to support its laws and
freedom.

During the trial, which lasted thirteen days, I was exceedingly
harassed, and my feelings were worked up to a state bordering on frenzy.
There was a host against me, and I had not a soul to advise me how to
proceed. I stood alone and unaided, with a limited education, to rebut
the whole mass of evidence adduced against me.

The time necessarily occupied in sending the proceedings of the
court-martial to my native country, and the long period which elapsed
before its return, were spent in the bosom of domestic bliss, where I
found refuge from the storm. The contemplation of my recent fall would
at times sink me in gloomy despair, and it was my wife only who could
divert my mind from useless forebodings, and whisper in my ear sweet
hopes of better days to come. I removed some miles from the regiment, as
I could not bear the commiserating remarks of the soldiers as they
passed me, which only served to plunge me deeper in the vortex of
despondency. From these motives I was induced to remove from that
station where my profession had been my pride and boast, to where I
should not meet the pitying countenances of those brave fellows with
whom I had often shared in glory, and where I could, unmolested and
undisturbed, think of the future, and compose my feelings. On leaving
the regiment, and passing by the houses of the officers, that hung on
the rapid Ganges, my feelings can be better imagined than described.
Need I be ashamed to confess that I felt the tear trickling down my
cheek, and a weight at my heart that the utmost ingenuity of man cannot
accurately describe. I could not help comparing my then forlorn
situation with the day I looked back on the little white village spire
out-topping the high poplars that reared their heads over the
briar-woven grave of my mother, save that I had now one near and dear to
me, and ever ready to share the cup of sorrow. Many of the men whom I
had befriended and had got promoted, followed my boat on the banks of
the river, wishing me every prosperity, till prudence bade them return
to their lines. The feelings I experienced on this occasion are such as
the tyrant soldier never knows, and never ought to know. These friendly
greetings of the men gratified my pride, but only sunk my heart deeper
in anguish. Scarcely were my feelings so composed as to reconcile me in
some degree to my fate, when an event, the most dreadful and agonizing,
and which of all others I was the least prepared for, happened to her on
whom I had built my most felicitous hopes, when more halcyon days should
visit our humble cot. I could have borne poverty with a smile of
contentment; but this blow was vital, and at once dashed the flattering
cup of hope from my lips. During my long and harassing trial, such was
the anxiety of my wife, that a premature birth of a boy was the
consequence. This had nearly deprived me of her who was my best friend
and guide; but, by dint of great care and good nursing, she recovered,
and was at this moment in all the health and beauty of twenty-two, and
expected shortly to present me with another pledge of mutual love. A
strange coincidence brought her good mother, brother, and sister to the
station, neither of whom we could have expected, and we all waited the
happy issue of this event. I cannot relate our preliminary proceedings
and great anxiety. Suffice it that, on the following morning, having
given birth, after twelve hours' protracted labour, to a beautiful boy,
she was a corpse, having that morning completed her two-and-twentieth
year. All my former misfortunes now rushed upon my distracted mind with
tenfold force, and this last blow seemed to bereave me of all that on
earth I could love; and my poor child, kissing the cold lips of his dead
mother, and pathetically beseeching her to get up and speak to him,
roused me to a full sense of my utter misery and woe. Neither his uncle
nor his aunt could drag him from embracing the corpse of his dear
mother; his cries were dreadful; and it was imagined, for some time
after, that the dear boy's intellect had received a shock that was
likely to prove lasting. He frequently wept bitterly, and would
affectionately hug and kiss, a thousand times, any little thing that had
been his mother's, preserving most carefully even little pieces of rag
or paper that he knew had been hers. My poor mother-in-law scarcely ever
spoke for the long period of six months, after this dreadful shock, but
lay in a melancholy state of insensibility, not knowing even her little
grandson, who would linger over her sick-bed for whole days together.

At this very crisis of my life the court-martial was communicated to me
as having been confirmed in England, and I was directed to proceed to
the Presidency of Fort William, preparatory to being sent home, to be
placed on the half-pay.

This final sentence was communicated to me through the regiment, some
few days after my wife's death, who was, therefore, spared this last
pang. When the letter was delivered to me, I was sitting on a couch with
my two motherless babes, one four years old, the other but a few days.
On tracing the contents of the letter, when my eager eyes met the words
"Dismissed the service," I could not repress the tear of anguish, nor
refrain from indulging in the most unavailing grief. To wind up a
military career like mine in this manner, was distressing indeed!

From the age of nine to forty-one, I had now been in the army--a period
of thirty-two years. My services during that time are already before the
reader. In the course of those services, I had received six
matchlock-ball wounds:--

One through the forehead, just above my eyes, which has so impaired my
sight, that I have been obliged to use glasses for some years past.

Two on the top of my head, from which have, at different times, been
extracted sixteen pieces of bone. These two wounds, at every change of
the weather, cause a most excruciating headache.

One in the fleshy part of the right arm.

One through the forefinger of my left hand. Of this finger I have
entirely lost the use, and I am still obliged to nurse it with great
care, several pieces of bone having been extracted from it, and some
splinters, as I fear, being still remaining.

One in the fleshy part of the right leg.

I had also received a flesh wound in my left shoulder, with several
other slighter wounds not worth particularizing.

The above wounds, except one, having been received prior to the
munificent grant of his present Majesty to wounded officers, I never
received a farthing remuneration, except ninety-six pounds for the
last--a year's pay as ensign.

I confess, then, I had entertained a sanguine hope, that the extent and
nature of my services, and the number of wounds I had received, would
have more than outweighed the offence of which I had been convicted, and
I felt the disappointment most acutely, and could not avoid giving vent
to my agonized feelings. I was aroused by the endearing behaviour of my
child, whose arms had, on his observing my grief, encircled my neck.
"What's the matter, father? you are always crying now, since mother is
gone away," said he. This was touching a tenderer chord than the babe
imagined, for he still supposed that his dear mother was gone for a time
only, and his constant inquiries were when she would return. We were
found in this state of woe by Captain Thomas Marshall, of the Bengal
army, my neighbour. This officer was my neighbour indeed; for his
kindness, and that of his amiable wife, towards me, were unabated and
unceasing. In the affectionate bosom of this lady my orphan babe found a
foster-mother, who shared with her infant, three days older than mine,
the one half of its best comfort. Towards this dear and affectionate
couple my heart will ever cherish the fond remembrance of gratitude, and
I hope this humble declaration may meet them in the far-distant clime in
which they sojourn. When Captain Marshall saw the sentence, he turned
from me, and walked into another room--for what purpose, I leave the
sympathizing reader to guess. He soon returned to me, and said, "Come,
Shipp, you have often mounted the breach of danger--cheer up--and
recollect you have those dear babes to clothe and feed." Here my little
boy, supposing that this was meant as a kind of rebuke, said, "I don't
want anything to eat, Captain Marshall; therefore, don't cry." These are
touches which the feeling heart can alone appreciate. To prevent, for
the time, any further indulgence in sorrow, I was prevailed on to
accompany my kind neighbour to his hospitable house, where I spent the
day with him, and where a little musical party assembled in the evening,
to rouse me from the state of despondency into which this last blow had
plunged me. But all attempts to divert me from the recollections of my
misfortunes were fruitless. Music and society but added to my pain; and
I found that I was never, for a length of time, so composed as in those
days and nights which I spent free from all company but that of my two
motherless babes, with whom only I could, if I may so express myself,
luxuriate in grief.

[Illustration: GHAUT ON THE GANGES.

From a Drawing by W. DANIELL, R.A.]

In one month after the confirmed sentence of the court-martial had been
made known to me, I was compelled to obey the orders which I had
received to repair to Calcutta, previous to embarkation for England. To
enable me to comply with these directions, I was obliged to sacrifice
all my property for a mere nothing, and I set out for the Presidency
with my little boy, now my only comfort, having made the little infant
over to my brother-in-law, J.P. Mellaird, Esq., indigo-planter Tirhoot,
where his grandmother, somewhat recovered, found refuge also.

The voyage down the lonely river Ganges was not calculated to soothe my
sorrows or to cheer my prospects. I reached Calcutta in safety, and
remained there a considerable time waiting for a ship, where, strange to
say, I received an order to proceed home with invalids, and to place
myself immediately under the command of Captain Mathers, of his
Majesty's 59th regiment. This order I was bound to obey; but it
prevented me from bringing home my little boy, as every part of the ship
was taken up for the troops, and the captain of the vessel would not
accommodate me under a thousand rupees--a sum which I had not to give. A
smaller foreign ship would have brought both myself and child home for
what the Company allow for officers sent home--fifteen hundred rupees.
By this I was deprived of the satisfaction of bringing home my child,
who remains in India with my brother-in-law to this day.

In the beginning of the month of April, 1825, I embarked on board the
free-trader, _Euphrates_, Captain Mead commanding, with an insufficient
crew, as they did not exceed twenty-three hands in all, and winter was
before us for the whole voyage. This would not have been a very pleasant
prospect to the shattered nerves of an old Indian; but mine, although I
had been so many years in that hot country, did not come under that
description, and I had learnt long since to endure hardships. I was
never much addicted to look on the dark side of things, but now it was
impossible to refrain from thinking of the situation in which I stood. I
was proceeding to a country, and that country my native home; but it was
not endeared to me by a solitary relative that I knew of. I could not
help comparing the close of my military career with its commencement. I
was then friendless and isolated; and who had I now but those who
mourned my departure from a land which I was compelled to quit for ever?
I left England, when a child, without one friend or relative to bid me
adieu, and I was now returning to it without one to bid me welcome! Yet
there is something pleasing to every British bosom, in the anticipation
of returning to the land of one's birth; and, although my prospects were
anything but bright, I felt, notwithstanding, that I could be content to
live in my native country, even in poverty. But the necessity which
compelled me to leave behind me my two sweet babes distressed me
exceedingly, and my eye seemed riveted on the arid sand along the banks
of the river that had some few days before borne my boy from my sight.
On the spot on which we parted I gazed with indescribable sensations,
and I found that the more I gazed the dearer it grew in my estimation.
There are few who have not experienced delight in revisiting, after many
years' absence, the scenes of their childhood. When I returned to my
native land from India, in the year 1807, after an absence of twelve
years, I was proceeding home to visit my family; but when I reached
Colchester (the place, as the reader will probably recollect, where I
commenced "soldiering"), all the gambols and tricks I had played there
when a boy, rushed upon my mind, and the place seemed endeared to me by
a thousand recollections. Such was my wish to re-explore this place,
that I forfeited my coach-hire for the rest of the journey, and stopped
there that night. Early on the following morning I sauntered along to
the lanes that stood in the vicinity of the barracks, and, on coming to
a certain lane that ran behind them, where we went every day to
practice, I found my name still on a stile. This had been cut by me when
I frequented the place as a little fifer, twelve years before. Such were
my feelings on this simple occasion, that I could scarcely restrain a
tear, and I sat on the stile for an hour, looking on my own name a
hundred times over. It will not, therefore, be wondered at, if the eye
of a fond father should fondly linger on the spot where he took leave
of, and last saw his motherless babe.

The scene before me in the vessel soon diverted me from the
contemplation of all other subjects. I could have brooded over the fate
of my dear little ones the whole night; but the din and tumult of more
than two hundred soldiers, with their friends from shore, all rioting in
the cup of inebriety, tumbling over each other, blaspheming, fighting,
singing, fifing, and fiddling, and all huddled together in a confined
space, with their beds, bedding, parrots, minors, and other birds,
roused me to a lively sense of the scene before me.

On the following morning we bade farewell to Fort William, under whose
proud battlements we had been lying. The wind was serene and fair, and
the wave had scarcely a ripple on its silvery surface. Would that my
bosom had been equally composed and tranquil; but my heart sickened
within me when I felt the beautiful ship smoothly gliding down the rapid
stream, and bearing me from that country and that service in which I had
spent the prime of my life, and, I may say, the happiest of my days. The
rapid Ganges soon bore me from the sight of the English flag, and I
dropped a tear to the recollection of the many happy days I had spent at
Fort William.

I soon found that I had a queer set to deal with, without the means of
checking any indiscretion that drunkenness might drive them to commit.
The captain commanding the detachment was in a dying state, and indeed
did die on his passage home; consequently, all the trouble, anxiety, and
care, fell upon me. I can venture to assert that, with the exception of
about twenty men, a more disorderly and mutinous set than the fellows I
had now under my charge, never disgraced the garb of soldiers.

An Eastern voyage, either home or out, is dull and monotonous enough,
even with an agreeable party. Passengers we had none, save one lady and
her little girl, her sick husband, the captain of the detachment, then
lingering on the brink of the grave, and a young officer of the
Company's Bengal Artillery, who survived but a few days the tossing of
the ship, and was committed to a watery grave, ere the bloom of boyhood
had left his cheek. We had one doctor on board, and a young officer of
the Company's service, in charge of the Company's troops. Of the misery
of the passage the reader may have some idea, when he is informed that
we had upwards of two hundred men on board, some without legs, others
without arms, and twenty of whom had been removed from hospital only a
week or ten days before we sailed. Every man had a box or trunk, bed and
bedding, with parrots, minors, and cockatoos, and all these poor
creatures, with four women and four children, were huddled on one small
deck, every one that could move endeavouring to seize the more secure
spot, and tumbling over and treading on those who were unable, either
from sickness or drunkenness, to move or assist themselves. The smell
and heat below were beyond description. Added to all this, the men were,
during the whole voyage, in a state of continual drunkenness, having
means of procuring liquor privately, by some device which I never could
discover. All my exertions were insufficient to check them in this
practice, or indeed to keep them in any kind of order, from want of the
usual means of enforcing obedience, there being neither a place of
confinement, nor handcuffs, nor any other means of securing the
ringleaders, in the ship. Nothing but the greatest personal risk on my
part, and that of the Company's officer, Lieutenant Rock, prevented open
mutiny among the troops; and I consider it a mercy that we were not both
thrown overboard, which was more than once threatened.

Some of the more refractory among the soldiers soon discovered that my
means to enforce obedience were limited; in consequence of which
three-fourths of them set my orders at defiance, refusing in the most
peremptory manner to obey me, even to clearing away their own filth and
dirt; and I was ultimately obliged, rather than provoke that spirit of
rebellion which I could evidently see only wanted some pretext to show
itself, to pay a set of men daily, as a working party, to clear the
deck, and keep off disease, so often occasioned on shipboard from a want
of cleanliness. This I did by allowing those men two extra drams per day
for their labour.

After a voyage of six months, spent in constant riot and anxiety, and
the misery of the whole increased by scurvy, which prevailed on board,
and the number of deaths which occurred during the passage, we at length
reached our native land in safety, having, in the course of the voyage,
thrown overboard the captain of the detachment, a lieutenant, who was a
passenger, thirty-eight soldiers, and one child, all of whom had died in
that short space of time. Most of the men fell victims to their
intemperance in drink.

We reached England in the month of October, landed at Gravesend, and, on
the following day, marched to the depôt at Chatham, where the detachment
was drawn up on parade, and I left them in charge of the staff-officer
of Fort Pitt Barrack.

The parade on which I then stood finished my military career of upwards
of thirty years--five-and-twenty of which I had spent on the burning
soil of India. I had but little cause to feel regret in resigning my
command over the turbulent and drunken set whom I now was about to
quit; but, situated as I was myself, I could not even leave those poor
creatures without a tear; and, when I reflected that I was no longer a
soldier, I felt a weight at my heart that sunk me almost to the earth.

The public are now in possession of a faithful account of the
vicissitudes which have marked the career of one who, in misfortune, can
pride himself on having performed his duty to his country, loyally,
faithfully, and, he trusts, bravely.

From my military readers I feel it impossible to part without a few
valedictory words. Brothers in arms, farewell! May the bright star from
heaven shine on your efforts, and may you be crowned with glory! May the
banner of Albion be hoisted in victory wherever it goes! As long as my
mortal sight will guide me along the annals of war, I will exult and
triumph in your successes, and drop a tear of pity for those that fall.
Comrades, farewell!

[Illustration]

[Illustration]




CHAPTER XXVI.

CONTINUATION OF THE MEMOIR, UNTIL THE DEATH OF MR. SHIPP.


The military career, traced in the preceding pages, has probably never
been surpassed either in homely, affecting narrative, or in thrilling
scenes of war and strife, by that of any soldier of modern times. That
Shipp did not rise more rapidly to the dizzy heights of a hero's
ambition, in a much shorter time, may reasonably be attributed to the
age in which he served, as well as to the peculiar regulations of our
service, than to any deficiency of fitness, ability, courage, or even
notoriety on his part. In the English army, all the avenues to
preferment are generally so crowded by aspirants of merit and influence,
and so jealously guarded by the legislature, that the best and most
valuable soldiers--men whose services acquire a very early
distinction--scarcely ever rise from the ranks to the elevation which
Shipp twice attained by his gallantry and soldiership. And it was the
consciousness of this fact, and the marked departure from the rigid
rules of the service, in the instance of his individual promotion, that
rendered him so resigned and submissive, under the heavy blow which his
own temerity subsequently inflicted upon him. Had his destiny enabled
him to steer past the siren pleasures that too often interrupt the path
of men possessing power, distinction, and popularity, it is more than
probable that, instead of being permitted to retire without any public
brand of disgrace upon his brow, into the obscurity of a private
station, he would have attained the highest rank in the British army,
and have been conspicuous, like Collingwood, not only for winning
victories more gloriously, but for describing them to his countrymen
more perspicuously than any military man of the age he lived in. It is
not in this little autobiography, written in so terse, agreeable, and
piquant a manner, that the brilliant exploits of Shipp would have been
sought for: the brightness of that page of history which recorded them,
would alone have secured the publicity of his renown. Few ever
possessed, more eminently, all the elements essential to success as a
soldier. Unimpeachable bravery, unwavering perseverance, cool fortitude,
and determined steadiness of purpose, were amongst the most conspicuous
of his attributes; and to these we may add an inexhaustible energy of
mind. Endowments of this nature are not often combined with clearness of
judgment, or with that discretion which cautiously avoids the precipice.
But if Shipp had not always his judgment entirely at command--which
frequently results from a habit of decision and promptitude, mistaken by
many for impetuosity--he was always fertile in resources, quick in
expedients, and any errors arising from his first impulses were amply
amended by the energy and skill with which he ultimately fulfilled every
tittle of the duty intrusted to him.

When John Shipp stood upon the parade at Chatham, in the October of
1825, he was, as he has himself informed us, performing the last of his
military duties. We have already seen with what feelings he bade adieu
to "the plumed troop and the big war"--to the profession which had been
the choice of his childhood and the pride of his riper years--amid which
he had grown and flourished; and, when he had resigned his command to
the officer of Fort Pitt Barrack, he wandered forth into the world a
melancholy man, because no longer a soldier. His military career was
thus finished, as he truly foreboded, for ever. That eventful and not
inglorious campaign of his existence, of which he has given so vivid an
account, was at an end, and he was now alone in the world, destitute of
occupation, and without immediate aim or object. Hitherto, his life had
been a romance, the various vicissitudes whereof forcibly verify the
adage, that "truth is stranger than fiction." Though the reader will
have henceforth to regard him as a mere civilian, his movements confined
to his native island, where stirring incidents and dashing adventures
are not rife, yet the details of his remaining years are not entirely
destitute of interest and instruction.

Although the first and natural feeling of the gallant ex-lieutenant, at
the contemplation of his position, was one of deep despondency, yet the
manliness of his nature forbid a tame submission to vain and bootless
melancholy. He had before risen superior to the oppression of that
gloomy goddess. His energies soon rallied, and the innate fortitude of
his character came to his aid. He was furnished with excellent
credentials from those officers with whom he had served; and, having
taken up his residence in the metropolis, he set himself sedulously to
work to procure employment. At first he was elated with hope, from the
numerous promises which he received, and the kindness and urbanity with
which his pretensions were entertained. He soon found, however, that
there was a difference between professions and practice--between
hospitality and active benevolence.

Amongst the first applications which he made, was one to the Court of
Directors of the East India Company, setting forth his services in
India, the wounds which he had received, and his other claims on their
favourable consideration. This application was successful; for, though
the Directors were unable to confer on him any appointment, they
generously granted him a pension of fifty pounds a year, for life,
commencing from the preceding Christmas. This honourable allowance was
sufficient to keep him above actual want; but, with the habits which he
had imbibed in a land where extravagance and luxury are almost regarded
as virtues, it was insufficient to keep him out of difficulties. He was
himself well aware, and willing to allow on all occasions, that his
chief failing was improvidence. Nor was he really extravagant; but he
possessed little knowledge of the value of money, and was as prodigal of
that essential commodity as if his supplies had been unlimited. His
generosity was so unbounded, that he has often been known to recompense
moderate services with a liberality wholly beyond his rank or means. The
resources derived from the India House soon failing, he renewed his
exertions to obtain employment, but still without success. Remembering
that the story of his life was full of interest, and having determined
upon telling it to the public, he turned himself with great perseverance
to his new occupation, and in a short time became fired with all the
ambition of an expectant author. As he was, however, naturally doubtful
of his own powers, he submitted his manuscripts to the revision of a
gentleman every way well qualified for the task, and who performed it
with equal judgment, good taste, and ability. This sanguine temperament
now led him to indulge in many a golden dream of the profits of
authorship; an error that occasioned more profuse expenditure than he
would, even with his acknowledged lack of worldly prudence, have deemed
excusable.

It was while he was under the delusion of this phantom--the expectation
of competent means from literary labours solely--that he thought of
submitting a second time to the bonds of Hymen; and the interesting and
amiable object of his affections has shown sufficiently the wisdom of
his choice, by her exemplary conduct and virtuous life, when placed in
circumstances painful, difficult, and trying. The only available means
of support under the increased expenditure that attended his married
state, was his pension from the India House--his chief prospective
supply, the result of his publications. As an author he displayed
invention and quickness; and the rapidity with which his works of
fiction appeared, was not less extraordinary than the imagination which
they displayed. In 1826 he published "The Shepherdess of Arranville; or,
Father and Daughter;" a pathetic tale in three acts; and, in 1829, "The
Maniac of the Pyrenees; or, the Heroic Soldier's Wife;" a melodrama in
two acts, printed at Brentford. The success of these light works,
however, was inferior to that of his Memoirs, which soon became
extensively popular, and have continued to gather favour with each added
year. This reputation resulted, not more from the exciting nature of the
details, than the freshness, rapidity, and air of candour, that pervades
the whole. Shipp certainly derived advantage from the advice and
assistance of an experienced and talented literary friend; but the
vigour, playfulness, and peculiarity of style which characterize all his
writings, were not infused by the pen of the ripe and ready writer--they
were original qualities of the composition. Encouraged by the reception
of his Memoirs, and urged by pinching poverty to constant efforts for
the improvement of his circumstances, he took advantage of his literary
popularity, and sent into the world his "Military Bijou," and a pamphlet
on military flogging. The latter, dedicated to Sir Francis Burdett,
produced a decided sensation, and was so much approved of by the
patriotic senator with whose name it was associated, that he generously
presented the author with a cheque for sixty pounds. Such precarious
supplies, however, could afford no permanent ease to a mind so
energetic, so unbroken by reverses, so incapable of yielding to any
untoward pressure of Providence: he applied himself, therefore,
resolutely to the obtainment of an employment attended with a certain
income, without regard to the amount of compensation, degree of
humility, or difficulty of position. Confident of his powers, physical
and intellectual; relying on the education derived from boundless
experience of men and manners, and being a perfect master of the art of
discipline, he very naturally concluded that his qualifications for the
situation of a metropolitan police officer were unequalled. He had
calculated rightly. Without a moment's hesitation--in fact accompanied
by an expression of regret that no more lucrative or suitable
appointment was vacant--the office of Inspector was stated to be at his
service, and to await his acceptance.

Entering with alacrity on the duties of his new appointment, he had the
good fortune to be introduced, by Colonel Rowan, to Lieutenant W.
Parlour, at that time superintendent of the Stepney division. This
employment was not only particularly agreeable to Mr. Shipp, from the
military rank of his superior in command, but laid the foundation of a
steady friendship, which terminated only with his death. Mr. Shipp's
talents and qualifications could not remain long unnoticed by the
commissioners; indeed, they had evinced their perfect knowledge of both,
and their desire to protect, encourage, and promote him, from the first
moment of his presenting himself, by their placing him under the command
of Lieutenant Parlour. A few months after Shipp's appointment,
Lieutenant Parlour was made superintendent of the Liverpool constabulary
force; and, on taking leave of his friend, assured him of his sincere
determination to assist in restoring him to a situation of independence
and respectful consideration. An opportunity soon presented itself. A
superintendent for the night watch at Liverpool being required, Parlour
sent an early communication to his friend Shipp, explaining all the
advantages, the amount of salary (£200 per annum), and the respectable
character of the employment; urging him to strain every nerve, turn
every stone, ply every engine, to obtain the vacant place. The very
conspicuous merits of Shipp soon distanced his numerous competitors, and
procured for him the object of his ambition.

As superintendent of the night watch at Liverpool, Mr. Shipp proved
himself a capable and efficient officer. By his intelligence, attention,
excellent management, and gentlemanly manners, he gained the confidence
and esteem, not only of the authorities, but of many individuals of
wealth and consideration in that opulent community.

We have alluded to the fondness for scribbling which had been evinced by
Mr. Shipp, from the period when he undertook the task of writing his
Memoirs. This propensity, so far from diminishing, seemed to gather
strength, till at length it became one of his favourite occupations. On
his first settlement in Liverpool, he contributed gratuitously, to
several of the local papers, tales illustrative of the manners of the
Hindoos. Shortly afterwards he published a rather ponderous volume,
entitled "The Eastern Story Teller:" but it is somewhat remarkable that
the real events of his own life surpassed in interest those which were
the offspring of his imagination.

His propensity for literary composition never interfered with his
responsible duties as an officer. Accustomed to command, and possessing,
from long experience, a thorough knowledge of character, he had the
force under his control in a state of admirable order and discipline.
Nor were there wanting several occasions for the display of that natural
intrepidity which was so striking a concomitant of his character. Though
he had command of a civil force, a military disposition was not
unfrequently required.

It was his duty to "set the watch" at a particular hour each
evening--the time, of course, varying according to the season. After
this it was his habit to take his round in the night, at some hour
casually selected, in order to keep the men alert and vigilant. He
resided in a district of the town called Toxteth Park, which was at that
period infested by gangs of ruffians known by the designation of Park
Bangers. Prior to the passing of the Municipal Act, Liverpool was not
protected by the efficient day and night police that has since been
established; and gangs of lawless individuals were in the habit of
attacking pedestrians, male and female, sometimes for wanton mischief,
and not unfrequently with the view of obtaining plunder. One winter's
morning, Mr. Shipp, having performed a portion of his round, was
returning home with the intention of taking a few hours' sleep, and then
resuming his duty: as he was passing along one of the streets of the
Park, his attention was attracted by a violent whirling of rattles, amid
which he heard the shrieks of a female. He rushed forward in the
direction of the sounds, and, on turning into a retired and respectable
suburban street, saw two of his men fleeing with all the speed that
their heavy habiliments would permit, before four fellows who brandished
heavy bludgeons. A little further on lay a watchman, apparently
insensible, while a couple of ruffians were kneeling over a prostrate
figure on the footwalk. Leaning against the rails for support was a
lady, whose shrieks had now subsided into heart-breaking sobs. Shipp saw
in one instant how matters stood, and he hesitated not for a moment what
course to take. Passing the fugitives and their pursuers, he rushed up
to the fellows who were rifling the man on the footwalk, and, with the
heavy stick which he always carried during his nocturnal perambulations,
laid them both prostrate beside their victim. The remainder of the gang
seeing this, turned from the pursuit of the watchmen, and rushed upon
him; but, calling to the fugitives, he contrived to dart through his
assailants, without receiving any injury save a contusion on the left
shoulder. Another watchman who had heard the rattles, at this moment
came; the two who were running off, hearing their superintendent's
voice, had returned, and all four now faced the gang, who, however,
fearing that the odds would soon be against them, fled, leaving one of
their number a prisoner in the grasp of Mr. Shipp, in addition to the
two whom he had prostrated, and who were then slowly recovering. The
victim of plunder had already recovered his legs. Mr. Shipp now learned
that he was a respectable tradesman of the town, who was returning home
from a Christmas festivity with his wife, when he was assailed by a gang
of thieves, who, finding that he resisted stoutly, struck him to the
ground. The cries of the lady brought the watchmen, one after another,
to the spot. The first was knocked down, and the two others, after
receiving a few blows, were running off in search of more assistance,
when their superintendent arrived in time to prevent the villains from
effecting their object.

Mr. Shipp was one evening taking a glass of wine with a few friends at
the King's Arms, one of the principal inns in Liverpool, when suddenly a
strange tumult was heard in the house, and sounds of feet passing
rapidly along the floors. At first the party took no notice of the
matter; but, a still more strange and unusual sound reaching their ears,
they gazed at each other in silence and amazement. Suspense to Shipp
being always intolerable, he rose at once, and, followed by his
companions, rushed into the passage, which was a spacious apartment.
Here they were met by vociferations of "Go back! go back! Mr. Shipp, and
shut your door." The advice was instantly followed by every one, save
Shipp alone, who, with that firm nerve that enabled him to face death in
various shapes, remained outside, where a melancholy spectacle met his
eyes. In the middle of the hall, just opposite the large window of the
bar, where a crowd of servants had taken refuge, and from whence they
called loudly for help, stood a grey-headed man, apparently about fifty
years of age, who, from his dress, appeared to be a helper in the
stable. In his right hand he grasped a carving-knife; and, while his
face appeared convulsed with the fury of a maniac, he uttered the most
fearful, though incoherent denunciations of vengeance, against any one
who should approach him. At this instant a young woman belonging to the
establishment came tripping down the stairs, whom the maniac perceiving,
he repeated the same fearful cry which had so startled the company in
the parlour, and, raising the knife, rushed at her. Shipp bounded after
him like the lion from his lair, seized his uplifted arm, and, jamming
the madman against the stairs with his knees, wrenched the weapon from
his grasp. The terrified waiter now stepped forward, and assisted in
securing the lunatic, who was immediately conveyed to Bridewell, and
from thence to a proper asylum. He was an old servant of the
establishment, who had on several occasions exhibited symptoms of mental
derangement, which ultimately became confirmed by habits of
intemperance. At length, on the evening in question, his malady had
broken out into decided madness.

Shipp used himself to relate an incident, which has so much the
character of romance, that it must not be omitted. He was seated one
afternoon in an alcove on the green of the hotel at Birkenhead, when, in
the adjoining recess, he overheard a deep masculine voice urging some
tender proposal to a female: and he was about to depart, when he was
struck by the extremely tremulous tones in which the girl refused
compliance. "I cannot consent to go," said she; "it would not be
proper."--"Well, but," replied the man, "I tell you your brother Tom is
to go with us; he has consented to the whole arrangement; the sloop is
in the river now, and we sail with the morning tide at five o'clock.
We're all ready. Tom'll go on board this night; and, as he is fully
expecting you, it will look foolish not to go. We can be married at
Guernsey immediately, you know; and I shall have such a nice cottage for
you; and we shall be as happy as possible."--"And why cannot I go on
board when Tom does?" asked the girl. "Why, you know, dear," replied the
man, with some hesitation, "the agents might board us this evening; and
I should not like them to see us with a woman in the sloop. But come--I
know you are not comfortable with that old aunt of yours; so just steal
out of the house, and be on the watch for us at the slip, at half-past
one. I shall have the boat waiting at one, close to the slip at
George's Pier; the tide will be running in; I will pull over, and take
you on board in a jiffy; and then away we go for beautiful Guernsey." A
few more low sounds of tender entreaty followed, and then the girl
seemed to yield a reluctant consent. The man, observing that she was
faint, proposed that she should walk on the green and take the air.
Shipp had then an opportunity of observing the pair. The girl was a
pretty, graceful, innocent-looking creature, about twenty-two years of
age. The man was a tall, swarthy, good-looking fellow, apparently a
master in the merchant service. Shipp at once recognized him as an
individual who had been, a few weeks before, convicted before the
magistrates of Liverpool for smuggling, and heavily fined. By
representation to the board, the fine had been considerably mitigated.

Shortly afterward, as Shipp was passing along the pier to the packet, he
again passed the lovers, who were just separating. "Remember half-past
one," said the man.--"I will," replied the girl, firmly; "tell brother
Tom I shall scold him when I come on board, for not coming over to see
me." The packet was moving from the pier, and the man stepped on board
at the same moment as Mr. Shipp. The former was almost immediately
accosted with great warmth by an individual, who pressed forward to meet
him. The two shook hands familiarly, the friend exclaiming, "Ah!
Captain, how are you? I haven't seen you this age. How's your wife?--is
she in Liverpool?"--"No," replied the other, "I left her at home in
Whitehaven three weeks ago, quite well and happy, thank you."--"And who
is that pretty girl whom you've just parted with? I'll tell your wife,
you rogue, the next time I see her. She ought to be jealous of
you."--"Oh," replied the captain, "she is sister to a new acquaintance
of mine; I've just been bidding her good-bye, as we sail to-morrow
morning."

Shipp now became interested in the event, as he was convinced that some
plot had been contrived, which would, in all probability, be fatal to
the happiness of an innocent girl. When the passengers landed, he
followed close to the man of whose proceedings he had become so
strangely cognizant. As if fate had determined to let him into the whole
secret, scarcely had the smuggler parted from the friend whom he had met
in the packet, when he encountered a young man whom he addressed by the
familiar appellation of Tom. "I've just left your sister," said he;
"she's quite well--sends her love to you, and all that sort of thing,
and wonders you have not been to see her. I told her you were going to
Birmingham:--by the way, when do you start?"--"At five o'clock; but I
wanted to see you before I went--how lucky I met you!"

Shipp heard no more, for he stood pondering on all that had passed under
his notice, irresolute how to act. His first thought was to return
immediately to Cheshire, and inform the young woman of the precipice on
which she stood. A moment's reflection convinced him of the
impracticability of this attempt, for he knew not her name or residence.
His next impulse was to follow the brother, and inform him of the snare
which had been laid for his sister. He turned, and followed in the
direction which the pair had taken, but he was unable to find them. His
next resolve, though not perhaps the most prudent that could have been
adopted, was exceedingly accordant with his character and disposition.

It was his habit, when going his nightly rounds, to wear a rough
overcoat of coarse blue cloth, and a broad-brimmed varnished hat,
similar to those frequently worn by boatmen. Dressed in this guise, a
few minutes before one o'clock, in the morning succeeding the afternoon
just adverted to, he walked along George's Pier. The night was moonless,
but not dark. The river was almost unruffled, though the faint light
cast by the stars into the atmosphere was reflected in long lines upon
the slight swell of the incoming tide. As he approached the steps, he
discerned a boat in which four men were seated. His quick eye
discovered that, as he had hoped, it was not a ship's boat, but one of
the regular river craft. He began to descend the steps, when one of the
boatmen exclaimed, "Is that you, Captain?"--"No," replied Shipp, coolly
stepping into the boat, and seating himself in her bows, "but he'll be
here immediately." The men, thinking he had been sent by the person who
had employed them, made no remark. Presently footsteps were heard
passing rapidly along the pier; the Captain, as the men called him,
descended the steps, sprung into the boat, and, not observing Shipp, or,
if he did so, thinking, from his position and appearance, that he was
one of the regular crew, ordered the men to "push off, and pull away
with a will." The men pulled with lusty sinews, and, in about half an
hour, laid the boat alongside the pier at Birkenhead. "Holla!" exclaimed
one of the boatmen, as their employer lifted a female into the boat, "is
it a woman, Captain? this ought to be double pay, at least."--"Hold your
tongue, man," replied the Captain, "and pull away for the sloop: I'll
steer, for I know where she lies." The men again tugged hard at the
oars, being as anxious as their employer to finish their job. Though the
tide was now against them, another half hour of labour brought the boat
alongside a small but handsome vessel, which was riding at anchor in the
stream. "Hold fast, men," said the Captain, springing up the side of the
sloop and gaining her deck; "stand by to help the lady, and then come on
board and take a glass of grog, and be paid."--"Ay, ay, sir," was the
ready response. It was now Shipp's turn to act. Stepping quickly to the
stern of the boat he exclaimed loudly, "Let go, men, and pull ashore
this instant. Young woman, you are deceived: this man is married: he has
a wife at Whitehaven, and your brother is not on board his sloop."--"And
who are you, Sir," exclaimed the master of the sloop, "that dare to
interfere in my affairs?" "I am one of the police-officers of
Liverpool," replied Shipp, "and I take this lady under my
protection."--"If she chooses to come into my vessel," said the master,
in a voice hoarse with passion, "I presume your interference is cursed
impertinent and uncalled for. You wish to come on board, Mary, don't
you?"--"Not if this be true," sobbed the girl; "if you are not deceiving
me, call brother Tom; you said he would be here."--"I tell you," said
Shipp, "your brother has gone to Birmingham, and you were on the point
of being ruined. Let go, men, or it will be worse for you!" Hearing
this, the boat-hook was instantly loosed, and the tide swept the boat
from the sloop's side in a moment. "And are we to lose our money?" said
one of the boatmen, as he reluctantly put out his oar; "we were to have
had thirty shillings for this job."--"I will pay you," said Shipp.
"Huzza!" exclaimed the boatmen, "pull away, my hearties!" As they rowed
to the pier, Shipp related to the girl all that he had witnessed and
overheard on the preceding day. "God bless you, Sir!" said she; "from
what misery you have saved me!" On the following day the girl returned
to her aunt, and, shortly afterwards, her brother called upon Shipp, and
thanked him fervently for the great service he had rendered.

In the month of May, 1833, the office of governor of the workhouse at
Liverpool became vacant by the death of Mr. Hardman, who had for many
years filled that situation. The special vestry, after mature
deliberation, decided upon recommending Mr. Hewett, master of St.
Andrew's, Holborn, London. The recommendation was, that Mr. Hewett and
his wife should be governor and matron, at the joint salary of £300 per
annum. As the situation was a very desirable one--a handsome residence,
with all the necessaries, comforts, and even luxuries of life being
provided, in addition to the salary--a host of candidates (no less than
thirty-seven) were quickly in the field. Amongst those who sought the
office was Mr. Shipp; and, though he came rather late to the goal, he
pursued the contest with his accustomed energy and perseverance.

On the 23rd of May, 1833, a special vestry was held for the purpose of
nominating candidates and electing a person to fill the office. Mr.
Hewett, who was backed by the most influential men of the select vestry,
was nominated by two of the members of that body, amid many expressions
of disapprobation. Other individuals were nominated by their respective
friends; but they were but coldly received. At length Mr. Venables, a
barrister of high standing and respectability, proposed John Shipp, with
a glowing eulogium on his character and qualifications. The nomination
was received with loud and reiterated cheers. Mr. Hall, also an eminent
barrister, afterwards a magistrate at Bow Street, seconded the
nomination. The show of hands being greatly in favour of Mr. and Mrs.
Shipp, a poll was demanded on behalf of the other individuals nominated.

On the following morning, at ten o'clock, the polling commenced at the
Sessions House, in Chapel Street. It was soon evident that Mr. Hewett,
the candidate recommended by the select vestry, had not the slightest
chance of success; and that gentleman accordingly resigned, an hour or
two after the opening of the poll. A contest unparalleled in elections
of this description followed between Mr. Shipp and Mr. Haram, who, with
a certain class, was the favourite candidate, though the popular voice
was for Mr. Shipp. The town was canvassed in every quarter, and placards
covered the walls in all directions, as at a parliamentary election. At
the close of the first day, Haram was upwards of 140 ahead of his
opponent. On the second day, Shipp brought up his lee-way, and at the
close of the poll on Monday he was upwards of 300 ahead. On Tuesday
morning Haram resigned the contest; and thus the election terminated in
favour of Mr. Shipp, whose majority was 352.

We now find Mr. Shipp in a position of comparative affluence, which
unfortunately he did not live long to enjoy. He was installed in his new
office of governor of the workhouse, at the end of May, 1833. Soon
after this he published a work called "The Private Soldier," a volume
which did equal honour to his head and heart, and evinced his ardent
love for that profession in which he had spent the best years of his
life. He was still pressed by embarrassments, to the increase of which
his literary speculations had in no slight degree contributed. The
emoluments of his new situation, had he survived, would have enabled him
to fulfil all his engagements, and make some provision for his family;
but he enjoyed the comforts of the competency which had been bestowed
upon him only a few months. In the February of 1834, he was suddenly
seized with an attack of pleurisy, which terminated his existence after
a few days of excruciating agony. He died on Thursday, the 27th of
February, at the age of fifty-two, and was interred on the following
Tuesday, in the chapel of St. Mary's cemetery. His funeral was attended
by a vast number of his friends, as well as by all the inmates of the
workhouse.

As Mr. Shipp had been greatly esteemed in Liverpool during his life,
much sympathy was excited on behalf of his widow; and, as soon as it was
known that her husband had died insolvent, a subscription was thought of
for her relief. The gentleman who promoted, with the greatest zeal, the
benevolent intentions of the public on behalf of the sorrowing widow,
was Mr. William Parlour, whose name occurs in a former part of this
Memoir. Through his instrumentality a meeting of Mr. Shipp's friends was
called, at which it was resolved that a subscription should be opened;
and in a few days £600 were collected. In addition to this liberal
amount, a gentleman who held a bill of sale, including the chattel
property of the deceased, made the widow a present of all the furniture
which had reverted to him--a gift then valued at £200. This timely
generosity--a tribute to the high character of her late husband, and to
her own exemplary conduct--sustained the widow and her fatherless
family, until that Providence, which never deserts the deserving, placed
her in a situation less profitable, but not dissimilar to her former
avocation.




THE END.

[Illustration]




APPENDIX.

NO. I.

    _Certificate of Major-General Gregory, attesting that Lieutenant Shipp
    led the Three Forlorn Hopes against Bhurtpore._


I hereby certify that Lieutenant John Shipp served with me in the
campaign of 1802, 3, 4, and 5, and that I was frequently an eyewitness
to his heroic and gallant conduct, more particularly in leading the
three forlorn hopes against Bhurtpore, in the year 1805.

                                 (Signed)               J.S. GREGORY,
    _Dinapore, 16th Nov., 1824._                       _Major-General_.


NO. II.

    _Copy of a Letter from the Commanding-Officer of the 76th Regiment,
    addressed to Lieutenant Shipp, on his quitting that Regiment, in 1808._

Dear Sir,--I cannot permit you to leave the regiment without expressing
my regret on your retiring from a service wherein you have acquitted
yourself with so much benefit to your country, and honour to your own
reflection. Your heroic conduct upon several trying occasions in India,
but more particularly at Deig and Bhurtpore (the marks of which you
bear), will long continue in the remembrance of your brother-officers.

Whatever may be your future pursuits in life, be assured you carry with
you my best esteem, and I shall be proud and happy to hear of your
welfare; and, should your restoration to health enable you again to
assume the duties of a soldier, I am confident your zeal and spirit will
add new laurels to the service of your country.

Wishing you every happiness, believe me to be, dear sir, most
respectfully and truly yours,

                                         (Signed)         JOHN COVELL,
                                  _Major, commanding the 76th Regiment._

    _Grouville, Jersey, 14th March, 1808._


No. III.

    _Official Certificate, that Lieutenant Shipp served with the 87th
    Regiment during the Second Campaign of the Goorkha War, when the
    Enemy's position at Chirecah Ghattie was turned, and afterwards,
    when the Enemy was defeated on the Heights of Muckwanpore. Also,
    that Lieutenant Shipp served with the Left Division of the Grand
    Army during the Mahratta and Pindaree War of 1817-18._

These are to certify, that Lieutenant John Shipp, of His Majesty's 87th
regiment of Foot, served with that corps during the second campaign of
the Goorkha war, and was attached to the light company of his regiment,
which formed part of the advanced-guard of the division under the
command of Major-General Sir David Ochterlony, Bart., G.C.B., when the
enemy's position, at the pass of Chirecah Ghattie, was turned; and
afterwards, when the enemy was defeated in a general attack on the
heights of Muckwanpore.

Lieutenant Shipp's conduct on the last occasion was much extolled,
having, in personal conflict, with one of the enemy's Sirdars, destroyed
him, when charging the light company on its ascending the hill of
Muckwanpore.

Lieutenant Shipp also served with his regiment at the siege of Hattrass;
and, being one of the first to enter the gate of that fortress, in
endeavouring to intercept the rajah and the garrison, then in the act of
abandoning the place, he received a wound in the hand.

Lieutenant Shipp afterwards served with the left division of the grand
army under the Marquis of Hastings, during the Mahratta and Pindaree war
of 1817-18, and was present at the several sieges in which the left
division was employed, as well as in the pursuit of the Pindarees.

                                    (Signed)              W.L. WATSON,
                    _Major, Assistant-Adjutant-General with the Troops
                               on the occasions above cited._

    _Calcutta, 6th Nov., 1824._


No. IV.

    _Attestation from Major-General Watson, in favour of Lieutenant
    Shipp's general conduct._

I hereby certify that I knew Mr. Shipp when in the army in the year
1817, at which time he was on my staff, in the East Indies; that I had
frequent opportunities of observing his character and conduct, and can
with truth say, I never knew a more active or zealous officer. I always
found him strictly honest, gentlemanlike, kind, and grateful, possessing
docility of manners and nice feelings.

                                 (Signed)                JAMES WATSON,
                                                        _Major-General_.

    _Denton, Whitby, March 14, 1827._


No. V.

    _Certificate from Major-General Newberry, of Lieutenant Shipp's
    conduct during the Pindaree Campaign._

Certified: that I have known Lieutenant Shipp since the year 1813. He
was in the 24th Dragoons with me, and was baggage-master to the left
division of the grand army during the Pindaree campaign. I always found
him a most brave, active, and zealous officer. He was a volunteer on my
staff when the left division fell in with an immense body of those
marauders, on the 14th of March, 1818; on that occasion Lieutenant Shipp
cut two of their men down.

                               (Signed)                   J. NEWBERRY,
                                                        _Major-General_.


No. VI.

    _Copy of a Letter from the Honourable the Directors of the East
    India Company, granting Lieutenant Shipp a Pension, in consideration
    of his Services and Wounds._

                                  _East India House, 27th January, 1826._

Sir,--Your letter of the 4th November, 1825, has been laid before the
Court of Directors of the East India Company, and I am commanded to
acquaint you that, adverting to the circumstance of your not having
derived the benefit of their resolution of the year 1809, to appoint you
a cadet in the Company's service, and in consideration of the
conspicuous gallantry which you have displayed on so many occasions, and
of the wounds received by you in the course of your service in India,
the Court have resolved that, as a mark of their favourable notice, you
be granted a pension of fifty pounds per annum, commencing from
Christmas last.

                            I am, &c.,

                                       (Signed)                J. DART,
    _Lieutenant John Shipp_,                                 _Secretary._
    _British Coffee-House, Cockspur Street._


No. VII.

    _Extract of a Letter, written by Captain Gully, 87th Regiment, to
    Sir Antony Butter, Bart., Lord Chief Justice of Calcutta, recommending
    Lieutenant Shipp to his Lordship's favourable Notice._


My dear Sir Antony,--From the very great regard I had for Lieutenant
Shipp, formerly of the 87th regiment, who was unfortunately dismissed
the service a short time since, but, in consequence of his general good
conduct as an officer and a gentleman, was recommended for the half-pay,
which was granted him, I hope you will excuse the liberty I take in
asking your assistance, should it be in your power, in getting him some
situation which would contribute towards his maintenance.

He has left us much regretted by, I may say, all the officers of the
corps. His conduct, previous to the unfortunate court-martial, was that
of a brave soldier, a steady friend, and an upright, honest man; and I
am convinced, should it be in your power to procure him a situation,
that he will fill it with the greatest exactness.

                        Believe me to remain, &c. &c.,
                              (Signed)                    W.L. GULLY.
    _Berhampore, 16th Dec., 1824._


UNWIN BROTHERS, THE GRESHAM PRESS, CHILWORTH AND LONDON.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Memoirs of the Extraordinary Military
Career of John Shipp, by John Shipp

